Requirement Statement
Security
HL7 IN 1.1 Entity Authentication
The solution should authenticate principals prior to accessing an EMR application or EMR data.
The solution should prevent access to EMR applications or EMR data to all non-authenticated principals.
The solution should provide the ability to implement a Chain of Trust agreement.
If other appropriate authentication mechanisms are absent, then the solution should authenticate principals using at least one of the following authentication mechanisms: username/password, digital certificate, secure token or biometrics.
HL7 IN 1.2 Entity Authorization
The solution should provide the ability to create and update sets of access-control permissions granted to principals.
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records) for the purpose of recording all authorization actions.
The solution should provide EMR security administrators with the ability to grant authorizations to principals according to scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide EMR security administrators with the ability to grant authorizations for roles according to scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide EMR security administrators with the ability to grant authorizations within contexts according to scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to define context for the purpose of principal authorization based on identity, role, work assignment, present condition, location, patient consent, or patient’s present condition.
The solution should provide the ability to define context based on legal requirements or disaster conditions.
HL7 IN 1.3 Entity Access Control
The solution should conform to function IN.1.1 (Entity Authentication).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.2 (Entity Authorization).
The solution should provide the ability to define solution and data access rules.
The solution should enforce solution and data access rules for all EMR resources (at component, application, or user level, either local or remote).
HL7 IN 1.4 Patient Access Management
The solution should conform to function IN.1.3 (Entity Access Control) in order for a healthcare delivery organization to manage a patient’s access to his or her healthcare information.
HL7 IN 1.5 Non-Repudiation
The solution should time stamp initial entry, modification, or exchange of data, and identify the actor/principal taking the action as required by users' scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide additional non-repudiation functionality where required by users' scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records) to prevent repudiation of data origination, receipt, or access.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.8 (Information Attestation) to ensure the integrity of data exchange and thus prevent repudiation of data origination or receipt.
HL7 IN 1.6 Secure Data Exchange
The solution should secure all modes of EMR data exchange.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.7 (Secure Data Routing).
The solution should provide the ability to obfuscate data.
The solution should encrypt and decrypt EMR data that is exchanged over a non-secure link.
The solution should support standards-based encryption mechanisms when encryption is used for secure data exchange.
HL7 IN 1.7 Secure Data Routing
The solution should automatically route electronically exchanged EMR data only from and to known sources and destinations and only over secure networks.
The solution should route electronically exchanged EMR data only to and from authenticated sources and destinations (conform to function IN.1.1 (Entity Authentication)).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records) to provide audit information about additions and changes to the status of destinations and sources.
HL7 IN 1.8 Information Attestation
The solution should conform to function IN.1.1 (Entity Authentication).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.2 (Entity Authorization).
The solution should provide the ability to associate any attestable content added or changed to an EMR with the content's author (for example by conforming to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
The solution should provide the ability for attestation of attestable EMR content by the content's author.
The solution should indicate the status of attestable data which has not been attested.
The solution should provide the ability for attestation of EMR content by properly authenticated and authorized users different from the author as required by users’ scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to use digital signatures as the means for attestation.
HL7 IN 1.9 Patient Privacy and Confidentiality
The solution should provide the ability to fully comply with the requirements for patient privacy and confidentiality in accordance with a user's scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.1 (Entity Authentication).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.2 (Entity Authorization).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.3 (Entity Access Control).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.5 (Non-Repudiation).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.6 (Secure Data Exchange).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
The solution should provide the ability to maintain varying levels of confidentiality in accordance with users' scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to mask parts of the electronic health record (e.g. medications, conditions, sensitive documents) from disclosure according to scope of practice, organizational policy or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to override a mask in emergency or other specific situations according to scope of practice, organizational policy or jurisdictional law.
Health Record Information and Management
HL7 IN 2.1 Data Retention, Availability and Destruction
The solution should provide the ability to store and retrieve health record data and clinical documents for the legally prescribed time.
The solution should provide the ability to retain inbound data or documents (related to health records) as originally received (unaltered, inclusive of the method in which they were received) for the legally organizationally prescribed time in accordance with users’ scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should retain the content of inbound data (related to health records) as originally received for the legally prescribed time.
The solution should provide the ability to retrieve both the information and business context data within which that information was obtained.
The solution should provide the ability to retrieve all the elements included in the definition of a legal medical record.
The solution should provide the ability to identify specific EMR data/records for destruction, review and confirm destruction before it occurs and implement  Auditable Records function.
The solution should provide the ability to destroy EMR data/records so that all traces are irrecoverably removed according to policy and legal retentions periods.
The solution should pass along record destruction date information (if any) along with existing data when providing records to another entity.
HL7 IN 2.2 Auditable Records
The solution should provide audit capabilities for recording access and usage of solutions, data, and organizational resources.
The solution should conform to Entity Authentication.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the time stamp for an object or data creation.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the time stamp for an object or data modification in accordance with users' scope or practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the time stamp for an object or data extraction in accordance with user's scope or practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the time stamp for an object or data exchange.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the time stamp for an object or data view.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the time stamp for an object or data deletion in accordance with user's scope or practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the author of a change in accordance with user's scope or practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the viewer of a data set.
The solution should provide audit capabilities indicating the data value before a change.
The solution should provide audit capabilities to capture solution events at the hardware and software architecture level.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.3 (Entity Access Control) to limit access to audit record information to appropriate entities in accordance with users’ scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to generate an audit report.
The solution should provide the ability to view change history for a particular record or data set in accordance with users’ scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to record system maintenance events for loading new versions of, or changes to, the clinical system.
The solution should provide the ability to record solution maintenance events for loading new versions of codes and knowledge bases.
The solution should provide the ability to record changing the date and time where the clinical solution allows this to be done.
The solution should provide the ability to record solution maintenance events for creating and restoring of backup.
The solution should provide the ability to record solution maintenance events for archiving any data.
The solution should provide the ability to record solution maintenance events for re-activating of an archived patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to record solution maintenance events for entry to and exit from the EMR solution.
The solution should provide the ability to record solution maintenance events for remote access connections including those for solution support and maintenance activities.
The solution should utilize standardized time keeping (for example using the IHE consistent time profile).
The solution should provide the ability to record and report upon audit information using a standards-based audit record format (for example RFC 3881).
HL7 IN 2.3 Synchronization
The solution should conform to function IN.5.1 (Interchange Standards).
The solution should conform to function IN.3 (Registry and Directory Services) to enable the use of registries and directories.
The solution should provide the ability to link entities to external information.
The solution should store the location of each known health record component in order to enable authorized access to a complete logical health record if the EMR is distributed among several applications within the EMR.
HL7 IN 2.4 Extraction of Health Record Information
The solution should provide the ability to extract health record information.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.6 (Secure Data Exchange) to provide secure data exchange capabilities.
The solution should provide the ability to de-identify extracted information.
The solution should conform to function IN.5.1 (Interchange Standards) to enable data extraction in standard-based formats.
The solution should provide the ability to perform extraction operations across the complete data set that constitutes the health record of an individual within the solution.
The solution should provide the ability to perform extraction operations whose output fully chronicles the healthcare process.
The solution should provide the ability to extract data for administrative purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to extract data for financial purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to extract data for research purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to extract data for quality analysis purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to extract data for public health purposes.
HL7 IN 2.5 Store and Manage Health Record Information
HL7 IN 2.5.1 Manage Unstructured Health Record Information
The solution should capture unstructured health record information as part of the patient EMR.
The solution should retrieve unstructured health record information as part of the patient EMR.
The solution should provide the ability to update unstructured health record information.
The solution should provide the ability to conform to Data Retention, Availability, and Destruction to provide the ability to inactivate, obsolete, or destroy unstructured health record information.
The solution should provide the ability to report unstructured health record information.
The solution should track unstructured health record information over time.
The solution should provide the ability to append corrected unstructured health record information to the original unstructured health record information. A specific type of implementation is not implied.
The solution should provide the ability to append unstructured health record information to the original unstructured health record information. A specific type of implementation is not implied.
The solution should provide the ability to append augmented unstructured health record information to the original unstructured health record information. A specific type of implementation is not implied.
HL7 IN 2.5.2 Manage Structured Health Record Information
The solution should capture structured health record information as part of the patient EMR.
The solution should retrieve structured health record information as part of the patient EMR.
The solution should provide the ability to update structured health record information.
The solution should conform to Data Retention, Availability, and Destruction to provide the ability to inactivate, obsolete, or destroy structured health record information.
The solution should provide the ability to report structured health record information.
The solution should track structured health record information over time.
The solution should provide the ability to retrieve each item of structured health care information discretely within patient context.
The solution should provide the ability to append corrected structured health record information to the original structured health record information. A specific type of implementation is not implied.
The solution should provide the ability to append structured health record information to the original structured health record information. A specific type of implementation is not implied.
The solution should provide the ability to append augmented structured health record information to the original structured health record information. A specific type of implementation is not implied.
Registry and Directory Service
The solution should provide the ability to use registry services and directories.
The solution should provide the ability to securely use registry services and directories.
The solution should conform to Interchange Standards to provide standard data interchange capabilities for using registry services and directories.
The solution should communicate with local registry services through standardized interfaces.
The solution should communicate with non-local registry services (that is, registry services that are external to an EMR) through standardized interfaces.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries or directories to uniquely identify patients for the provision of care.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries or directories to uniquely identify providers for the provision of care.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries or directories to retrieve links to relevant healthcare information regarding a patient.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries to supply links to relevant healthcare information regarding a patient.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries or directories to identify payers, health plans, and sponsors for administrative and financial purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries or directories to identify employers for administrative and financial purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries or directories to identify public health agencies for healthcare purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to use registries or directories to identify healthcare resources and devices for resource management purposes.
Standard Terminologies and Terminology Services
HL7 IN 4.1 Standard Terminologies and Terminology Models
The solution should provide the ability to use standard terminologies to communicate with other solutions (internal or external to the EMR).
The solution should provide the ability to validate that clinical terms and coded clinical data exists in a current standard terminology.
The solution should provide the ability to exchange healthcare data using formal standard information models and standard terminologies.
The solution should provide the ability to use a formal standard terminology model.
The solution should provide the ability to use hierarchical inference searches e.g. subsumption across coded terminology concepts that were expressed using standard terminology models.
The solution should provide the ability to use a terminology service (internal or external to the EMR).
If there is no standard terminology model available, then the solution should provide a formal explicit terminology model.
HL7 IN 4.2 Maintenance and Versioning of Standard Terminologies
The solution should provide the ability to use different versions of terminology standards.
The solution should provide the ability to update terminology standards.
The solution should relate modified concepts in the different versions of a terminology standard to allow preservation of interpretations over time.
The solution should provide the ability to interoperate with solutions that use known different versions of a terminology standard.
The solution should provide the ability to deprecate terminologies.
The solution should provide the ability to deprecate individual codes within a terminology.
The solution should provide the ability to cascade terminology changes where coded terminology content is embedded in clinical models (for example, templates and custom formularies) when the cascaded terminology changes can ge accomplished unambiguously.
The solution should apply changes in terminology to all new clinical content (via templates, custom formularies).
HL7 IN 4.3 Terminology Mapping
The solution should provide the ability to use a terminology map.
The solution should provide the ability to use standard terminology services for the purposes of mapping terminologies.
The solution should provide the ability for a user to validate a mapping.
The solution should provide the ability to create a terminology map.
Standards-based Interoperability
HL7 IN 5.1 Interchange Standards
The solution should provide the ability to use interchange standards as required by realm specific and/or local profiles.
The solution should provide the ability to seamlessly perform interchange operations with other solutions that adhere to recognized interchange standards.
The solution should conform to Standard Terminologies and Terminology Services to support terminology standards in accordance with a user's scope of practice, organizational policy, or jurisdictional law.
If there is no standard information model available, then the solution should provide a formal explicit information model in order to support the ability to operate seamlessly with other solutions.
The solution should provide the ability to exchange data using an explicit and formal information model and standard, coded terminology.
HL7 IN 5.2 Interchange Standards Versioning and Maintenance
The solution should provide the ability to use different versions of interchange standards.
The solution should provide the ability to change (reconfigure) the way that data is transmitted as an interchange standard evolves over time and in accordance with business needs.
The solution should provide the ability to deprecate an interchange standard.
The solution should provide the ability to interoperate with other solutions that use known earlier versions of an interoperability standard.
HL7 IN 5.3 Standards-based Application Integration
The solution should provide the ability to support standards-based application integration.
HL7 IN 5.4 Interchange Agreements
The solution should use interchange agreement descriptions when exchanging information with partners.
The solution should use interchange agreement description standards (when available).
The solution should conform to Registry and Directory Services to interact with entity directories to determine the address, profile, and data exchange requirements of known and/or potential partners.
The solution should provide the ability to automatically discover interchange services and capabilities.
Business Rules Management
The solution should provide the ability to manage business rules.
The solution should provide the ability to create, import, or access decision support rules to guide solution behavior.
The solution should provide the ability to update decision support rules.
The solution should provide the ability to customize decision support rules and their components.
The solution should provide the ability to inactivate, obsolete, or destroy decision support rules.
The solution should conform to Auditable Records to audit all changes to decision support rules.
The solution should provide the ability to create diagnostic support rules to guide solution behavior.
The solution should provide the ability to update diagnostic support rules.
The solution should provide the ability to customize diagnostic support rules and their components.
The solution should provide the ability to inactivate, obsolete, or destroy diagnostic support rules.
The solution should conform to Auditable Records to audit all changes to diagnostic support rules.
The solution should provide the ability to create workflow control rules to guide solution behavior.
The solution should provide the ability to update workflow control rules.
The solution should provide the ability to customize workflow control rules and their components.
The solution should provide the ability to inactivate, obsolete, or destroy workflow control rules.
The solution should conform to Auditable Records to audit all changes to workflow control rules.
The solution should provide the ability to create access privilege rules to guide solution behavior.
The solution should provide the ability to update access privilege rules.
The solution should provide the ability to customize access privilege rules and their components.
The solution should provide the ability to inactivate, obsolete, or destroy privilege rules.
The solution should conform to Auditable Records to audit all changes to privilege rules.
The solution should conform to Auditable Records to audit all changes to other business rules.
The solution should support the ability to selectively export business rules.
Workflow Management
The solution should use workflow-related business rules to direct the flow of work assignments.
The solution should provide the ability to create workflow (task list) queues.
The solution should provide the ability to manage workflow (task list) queues.
The solution should provide the ability to manage human resources (i.e., personnel lists) for workflow queues.
The solution should use solution interfaces that support the management of human resources (i.e., personnel lists).
The solution should use solution interfaces that support the management of workflow (task lists) queues.
The solution should provide the ability to distribute information to and from internal and external parties.
The solution should provide the ability to route notifications and tasks based on solution triggers.
The solution should dynamically escalate workflow according to business rules.
The solution should dynamically redirect workflow according to business rules.
The solution should dynamically reassign workflow according to business rules.
Requirement Statement
The solution should address the management of information solution accounts, including establishing, activating, modifying, reviewing, disabling, and removing accounts. The solution will also identify the appropriate organizational unit to review information solution accounts at least annually.
The solution should enforce assigned authorizations for controlling access to the solution in accordance with applicable policy.
The solution enforces assigned authorizations for controlling the flow of information within the solution and between interconnected solutions in accordance with applicable policy.
The solution should enforce separation of duties through assigned access authorizations.
The solution should enforce the most restrictive set of rights/privileges or accesses needed by users (or processes acting on behalf of users) for the performance of specified tasks.
The solution should enforce a limit of five (5) consecutive invalid access attempts by a user during a 60 second time period. The information solution automatically locks the account/node for a five (5) minute time period when the maximum number of unsuccessful attempts is exceeded.
The solution should display an approved, solution use notification message before granting solution access informing potential users: (i) that the user is accessing a CCHCS information solution; (ii) that solution usage may be monitored, recorded, and subject to audit; (iii) that unauthorized use of the solution is prohibited and subject to criminal and civil penalties; and (iv) that use of the solution indicates consent to monitoring and recording. The solution should use notification message provides appropriate privacy and security notices (based on associated privacy and security policies or summaries) and remains on the screen until the user takes explicit actions to log on to the information solution.
The solution should notify the user, upon successful logon, of the date and time of the last logon, and the number of unsuccessful logon attempts since the last successful logon.
The solution should limit the number of concurrent sessions for any user to three (3).
Thesolution should prevent further access to the solution by initiating a session lock after 15 minutes of inactivity, and the session lock remains in effect until the user reestablishes access using appropriate identification and authentication procedures.
The solution should automatically terminate a remote session after 30 minutes of inactivity.
The solution should assign responsibility to supervise and review the activities of users with respect to the enforcement and usage of information solution access controls.
The solution should identify and document specific user actions that can be performed on the information solution without identification or authentication.
The solution should mark any output using standard naming conventions to identify any special dissemination, handling, or distribution instructions.
The solution should appropriately label information in storage, in process, and in transmission.
The solution should provide mechanisms to ensure the authorization, monitoring, and control of all methods of remote access to the solution.
The solution architect should work with the appropriate CCHCS staff to (i) establish usage restrictions and implementation guidance for wireless technologies; and (ii) authorize, monitor, control wireless access to the solution.
The solution should generate audit records for the following events: 
* successful user logins
* unsuccessful user logins
* user logouts 
* record activity in information solutions that contain or use electronic protected health information
* use of privileges
* use of solution utilities
* changes to solution configurations
* alarms raised by access control solution
* files accessed 
* file operations (PUT, GET, DELETE, MKDIR, etc.)
The solution should produce audit records that contain at a minimum: 
* Date of event
* Time of event
* Type of event (solution, security, application)
* Username or user ID
* Source IP address, source terminal identity, or some type of unique source identifier
The solution should allocate sufficient audit record storage capacity and configures auditing to reduce the likelihood of such capacity being exceeded.
The solution should alert appropriate organizational officials in the event of an audit processing failure and begins to overwrite oldest audit records or shuts down the solution.
The solution should assign responsiblity for regular reviews/analyzation of information solution audit records for indications of inappropriate or unusual activity, investigates suspicious activity or suspected violations, reports findings to appropriate officials, and takes necessary actions.
The solution should provide an audit reduction and report generation capability.
The solution should provide time stamps that are synchronized with the authoritative enterprise time server for use in audit record generation.
The solution should protect audit information and audit tools from unauthorized access, modification, and deletion.
The solution should provide the capability to determine whether a given individual took a particular action.
The solution should retain audit records for 180 days to provide support for after-the-fact investigations of security incidents and to meet regulatory and organizational information retention requirements.
The solution should uniquely identifiy and authenticate users (or processes acting on behalf of users).
The solution should identify and authenticate specific devices before establishing a connection.
The solution should manage user identifiers by: (i) uniquely identifying each user; (ii) verifying the identity of each user; (iii) receiving authorization to issue a user identifier from an appropriate organization official(s); (iv) issuing the user identifier to the intended party; (v) disabling the user identifier after 30 days of inactivity; and (vi) archiving user identifiers.
The solution should assign responsibility for managing information solution authenticators by: (i) defining initial authenticator content; (ii) establishing administrative procedures for initial authenticator distribution, for lost/compromised, or damaged authenticators, and for revoking authenticators; (iii) changing default authenticators upon information solution installation; and (iv) changing/refreshing authenticators periodically.
The solution should obscure feedback of authentication information during the authentication process to protect the information from possible exploitation/use by unauthorized individuals.
The solution should employ authentication methods that meet the requirements of applicable laws, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance for authentication to a cryptographic module.
The solution should separate user functionality (including user interface services) from information solution management functionality.
The solution should isolate security functions from nonsecurity functions.
The solution should prevent unauthorized and unintended information transfer via shared solution resources.
The solution should protect against or limits the effects of denial of service attacks.
The solution should limit the use of resources by priority.
The solution should monitor and control communications at the external boundary of the information solution and at key internal boundaries within the solution.
The solution should protect the integrity of transmitted information.
The solution should protect the confidentiality of transmitted information.
The solution should terminate a network connection at the end of a session or after 30 minutes of inactivity.
The solution should establish a trusted communication path between the user and the following security functions of the solution: information solution authentication and reauthentication and confidential data transport.
When cryptography is required and employed within the information solution, the organization should establish and manage cryptographic keys using automated or manual mechanisms that have clearly defined and appropriately documented supporting procedures.
For information requiring cryptographic protection, the information solution should implement cryptographic mechanisms that comply with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance.
The solution should protect the integrity and availability of publicly available information and applications.
The solution should prohibit remote activation of collaborative computing mechanisms and provide an explicit indication of use to the local users.
The solution should reliably associate security parameters with information exchanged between information solutions.
The organization should issue public key certificates under an appropriate certificate policy or obtain public key certificates under an appropriate certificate policy from an approved service provider.
The organization should: (i) establish usage restrictions and implementation guidance for mobile code technologies based on the potential to cause damage to the information solution if used maliciously; and (ii) authorize, monitor, and control the use of mobile code within the information solution.
The information solution that provides name/address resolution service provides additional data origin and integrity artifacts along with the authoritative data it returns in response to resolution queries.
The information solution that provides name/address resolution service for local clients should perform data origin authentication and data integrity verification on the resolution responses it receives from authoritative sources when requested by client solutions.
The information solutions that collectively provide name/address resolution service for an organization should be fault tolerant and implement role separation.
The solution should provide mechanisms to protect the authenticity of communications sessions.
Solution should provide procedures that demonstrate an approach for regular records’ reviews of information system activities for authorized access, such as audit logs, access reports, and security incident tracking reports.

Refer to  "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
Solution should include the performance of a business impact analysis (BIA) that allows the maximum allowable outage, and whether the solution requires a Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP).  If included, the DRP must include strategies for recovery, and procedures for testing the DRP.
Solution should include a Security Plan in accordance to NIST 800-18 and subject to the approval of the agencies’ Information Security Officer.
The solution should provide documentation that must be maintained for the system/application.  This should include the following:  
o Security plan;
o Detailed design;
o Description of hardware, software, and network components;
o Special system configurations;
o External interfaces;
o All layers of security controls;
o Auditing interface.
The solution should provide documentation on information classification matrix of all information elements accessed and/or processed by the solution.  The matrix shall identify at a minimum:
o Information element;
o Information classification/sensitivity;
o Relevant function/process or where is it used;
o System and database or where is it stored.
The solution must provide documentation that for the following example roles, with processes to ensure each person understands their role, and complies with all applicable regulations.  Documentation should include the organizational structure and relationships between these example roles:
o The designated owner of the system;
o The designated custodian(s) of the system;
o The security administrator(s) for the system;
o The users of the system;
o Outside entities sending or receiving data to system.
The solution should include an incident response plan.  This plan must be developed and maintained, which complies with all applicable requirements including business associate agreements, and state and federal breach reporting requirements.

o The plan must ensure immediate notification to the appropriate security officials (e.g. Privacy Officer and ISO) for any suspected breach or compromise of system security.  Prompt corrective action must be taken, and provided to the security officials in a documented Corrective Action Plan.  The plan must address handling of both technical and non-technical privacy and security incidents, including initial response, corrective actions, documentation, and reporting. The plan must address responding to compromised account credentials, such as passwords stolen by a key logger.  The response should include disabling the account until corrective actions are complete and pulling audit logs for analysis of potential unauthorized access;

o Depending on the nature of the breach or compromise, the security officials may require a security audit.
The solution should provide the ability for account reconciliations.  These account reconciliations should include the following:
o Unused account review;
o Active account review.

Refer to  "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
• Solution should meet the following additional and relevant technical controls:
o Virus Protection;
o Intrusion Detection and Prevention solution (IDS/IPS).
o Patch Management.

All transmissions and data-links sending PHI or PI data between the application/system and the Database Management System (DBMS) should be encrypted using FIPS 140-2 validated software; refer to "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
Solution shall be segmented into three layers, separating at a minimum the Presentation, Application/Business Logic, and Data Persistence/Database layers.  These layers shall be separated by an Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Layer 3 or Layer 4 firewall, and configured with only the minimum necessary open ports and protocols.  A Layer 4 firewall with anomaly detection and/or heuristics capabilities is recommended.  The Presentation layer must only contain systems that provide services directly to the Internet. These protocols include DNS, SMTP, HTTP, HTTPS, and encrypted FTP servers. Any system that the web tier communicates with, but that does not provide a direct internet service (such as directory services, middleware, etc.) must be installed on the Application layer. Where unfeasible to separate the Presentation and Application/Business Logic layers, a proxy server may be used to isolate non-Presentation layer services.  This must be documented in the application’s approved security plan.
Direct access to the Data Persistence/Database layer is only permitted through a logical Data Access logic layer, using a trusted sub-system that utilizes a single database access account for all transactions. The Data Access Logic Layer shall take the form of stored procedures, database API, Data Access Objects/Components, Data Access Middleware, Shared Data Services, or Secure Web Service. 

System requests made to the Business logic and Data Access logic layers shall be authenticated and authorized. Dynamic SQL shall not be permitted from the Presentation Layer.   Applications shall use an alias for every table and column, so that Database table names and column names shall not be exposed.
Solution shall enforce validation of user input before accepting it, and before being committed to the database or other application information repository.  Data queries from the Presentation or the Business Logic layers shall be validated for appropriate use of query language, and validated for appropriate quantity and quality of data input.  This includes In-line Structured Query Language (SQL) calls. The system shall validate client input on the server side to the extent possible.  

Refer to  "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
Administrative/Privileged accounts are any special User ID’s that are created for system administration or elevated privilege purposes by a single individual.  These requirements apply to any such type of account with administrative privileges or any other type of escalated privileges.  System administration shall be performed using a different username than the one used for daily non-administrative activities. Administrative accounts must be used only for administrative activity within the authorized role of that account and the individual using it. It must be logged out of immediately after administrative work is complete.  Generic accounts not linked to a specific person, such as service accounts, must not be used in accessing PHI or PI, or in making changes to IT systems which protect that data, unless there are logs in place that identify the actual individual who accessed the data or made the system change.

Refer to  "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
Solution should provide secure role-based access for authorization utilizing the principle of least privilege at all layers/tiers. Applications shall in all cases default to explicitly deny access where authentication and/or authorization mechanisms are required.  No application that requires a login shall offer to or be capable of remembering a user’s credentials. There shall be role separation between system/server administrators and application/database administrators, using the principle of least privilege.

Refer to  "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
For any application which accesses PHI or PI, the following technical controls shall be present, unless an exception is granted by the agency's ISO:
o The application shall use ‘least privileged accounts’ to execute code and to access SQL databases;
o User access rights shall be authenticated on entry to each application tier;
o All user input shall be validated, including parameters passed to public web service methods;
o Information that is not required shall not be exposed; 
o If a web application fails, it shall not leave sensitive data unprotected or expose any details in error messages presented to the user.  Any exceptions shall be logged or emailed to the appropriate team member;
o Any sensitive data stored in session, cookies, disk files etc., shall be encrypted.  
o Applications shall be protected from the Internet by a web application firewall/gateway/proxy, which shall be included in the documented system design;
o Post back Universal Resource Locators (URLs) shall not contain unencrypted record identifiers or database keys;
o Post back URLs shall not include query strings.

Refer to  "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
The solution must be scanned for vulnerabilities and the high and medium vulnerabilities must be resolved and mitigated.
The solution should undergo a penetration testing to ensure the solution has no flaws, and the high or medium vulnerabilities detected must be resolved and mitigated.
The solution if providing access to PI or PHI from the Internet should assess the need for additional strong authentication, to prevent a significant data breach if a password is compromised. 

Strong authentication is defined as additional mandatory authentication over and beyond the password, for each account which has direct access to PI/PHI, or which has administrative privileges. The following methods are approved for strong authentication:
o Physical Token;
o One Time Password (OTP);
o X.509 Certificate;
o Firewall Rules.

• The following strong authentication method is approved for personal data access, where accounts have access to only the account holder’s personal data, or a single data record they are custodian over such as a family member or information about their company.  For example, an application where a client can submit or edit an enrollment form for themselves or someone else, but cannot access any other data records.
o Personal Challenge Questions.


Refer to  "Attachment 8 - EMR Technical Evaluation Criteria - Worksheet" as appropriate
Requirement Statement
Architecture Requirements
Architecture Quality Attributes
Scalability
The solution should scale, maintaining acceptable performance, as the number of concurrent users increase.
The solution should scale, maintaining acceptable performance, as the number of transactions increase.
The solution should scale, maintaining acceptable performance, as the number of patients increase.
The solution should be stable and will operate for sustained amounts of time without interruption.
The solution should support 33 CDCR institutions and headquarters.
Reliability
The solution should be reliable. Reliability is the ability to rely on the system. Reliability is impacted primarily by the quality of the system. Reliability means that the user can rely on the accuracy of the system.
The solution should use proven technologies and products. Technologies and products will only be approved after they have been proven in the marketplace (i.e. released to customers for at least 6 months).
Recoverability
solution should be able to generate a backup copy of the application data, security credentials, and log/audit files.
The system restore functionality should result in a fully operational and secure state. This state should include the restoration of the application data, security credentials, and log/audit files to their previous state.
The system should have ability to run a backup concurrently with the operation of the application.
The solution Mean Time to Repair (MTTR) should be: The solution average repair time should be less than four (4) hours.
The solution Recovery Time Objective (RTO) should be: The solution should be restored within 72 hours after a disaster (or disruption) in order to avoid unacceptable consequences associated with a break in business continuity.
The solution Recovery Point Objective (RPO) should be: The solution should restore data as of previous business day.
Maintainability
The solution should be maintainable that enables developers to debug, fix, integrate, and test. The marketplace should provide trained, affordable staff that have the skill sets to maintain the system.
The solution should provide end-to-end traceability of each transaction. Each message element of a transaction should be loggable each time it enters or leaves a host system of the
solution.
The solution should use supported software release levels. Computer software will be maintained at proven, stable version release levels that are supported by vendors.
Extensbility
The solution should be extensible where the solution can accommodate new functionality without compromising the system's dependability or future extensibility.
The solution should be configurable which allows the user or developer to configure the system to meet changing requirements without changing code.
Usability
The solution should have a user interface compliant with American Disability Act (i.e., Section 508 compliant).
Availability
The solution should support load balancing across servers.
The solution should support fail-over in the event of a failure to ensure the solution is highly available.
Integrity
The solution should  enforce referential integrity.
The solution should be configurable to prevent corruption or loss of data already accepted into the system in the event of a system failure (e.g. integrating with a UPS, etc.).
Product architecture
The solution should allow for use of 3rd party reporting tools.
The solution should support concurrency. Concurrency is the ability for multiple instances of the same process (or batch program) to execute at the same time.
The should use a layered architecture where business components/services can be reused across multiple interfaces (e.g. Web, IVR, mobile). A layered architecture defines a clean separation between client, business logic, and database access.
The solution should be able to support time synchronization using NTP/SNTP, and use this synchronized time in all security records of time.
All email capabilities of the system must support the IETF Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) and/or IETF Post Office Protocol (POP) standards.
The solution should support IETF Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) and/or Microsoft Active Directory integration as the mechanism to retrieve authentication information.
The solution should use IAB Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) for network communications.
The solution should support IETF SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) for file transfer capabilities.
The solution should support IETF Domain Name System (DNS).
The solution should support IETF Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP).
The solution should support W3C Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTPS).
All server components of CCHCS solutions should run on Microsoft Windows Server and/or Red Hat Linux. 
All client desktop components of CCHCS solutions should run on Microsoft Windows Client operating system.
All transactional data should be stored in a relational database that supports SQL.
All enterprise relational databases should be implemented using Microsoft SQL Server or Oracle Database technologies. 
The solution should provide data retention of all patient-inmate information in a form that is accessible for auditing, analysis, and reporting.
The solution should store seven (7) years of patient-inmate information within the operational data store.
System Development Life Cycle
The solution should provide the ability to migrate setups/data between environments with minimal reconfigurations, reentry of data, or installs.
The solution should provide the ability to customize and extend the product .Net, Java or XML technologies.
All system configurations should be supported by the COTS upgrade process. Solution upgrades should not affect past customizations and should be verified by custom test scripts.
The build, release, and install processes should be documented and repeatable.
Environments (physical or virtual) should be available to support development, testing, production, and production fix processes.
The solution should support version control of the product's development, test, or production configurations via an external management software product.
All configuration items (e.g. COTS extensions, configuration files, system interface programs, data conversion programs) should be under configuration management control.
The solution should support automation of the testing process natively or through integration with other COTS testing tools.
Debugging capabilities should exist for all development items (e.g. workflows, extensions, custom adapters, transformations).
Integration
The integration architecture should support a service-oriented architecture (SOA) which is a software design approach in which an application consists of software services and software service consumers.
The solution should provide SOA integration capabilities that conforms to  Web Services Interoperability (WS-I).
CCHCS Electronic Health Record (eUHR - Documentum)
The solution should integrate with the existing CCHCS Documentum platform, known as eUHR, to store patient documents. 
The solution should integrate with eUHR search & retrieve a list of patient documents. 
The solution should integrate with eUHR retrieve & display patient documents. 
CCHCS PACS/RIS
The solution should integrate with CCHCS PACS/RIS solution to retrieve & display patient images. 
CCHCS Dictation & Translation
The solution should integrate with CCHCS;s Dictation and Transcription to retrieve and play dictated and transcribed medical records for patients.
CCHCS Third Party Administrator
The solution should integrate with CCHCS' Third Party Administrator to send them health care claims for processing.
Quest 360
The solution should integrate with Quest 360 to retrieve & display lab results.
CCHCS Central Fill Solution
The solution should integrate with Central Fill solution to submit medication orders.
The solution should integrate with Central Fill solution to receive medication dispense information.
CCHCS Medical Classification
The solution should integrate with the Medical Classification solution to track patient classification.
CDCR Strategic Offender Management System (SOMS)
The solution should integrate with CDCR SOMS to retrieve patient demographic data.
The solution should integrate with CDCR SOMS to post new or changed appointments on the inmate's calendar.
The solution should integrate with CDCR SOMS to receive notifications that a healthcare appointment has been "bumped" by a higher priority appointment and it needs to be rescheduled.
The solution should integrate with CDCR SOMS to receive patient movement notifications.
The solution should integrate with CDCR SOMS to receive TB assessment data.
The solution should integrate with CDCR SOMS to receive patient Effective Communications/ADA information.
CCHCS Technical  Infrastructure
The solution should leverage CCHCS Digital Signature infrastructure for digital signatures.
The solution should leverage CCHCS Secure FTP infrastructure for sending files external to CCHCS data center.
The solution should leverage CCHCS Wireless infrastructure for mobile devices.
CCHCS EMR Data Access
The solution should provide an open interface to enable CCHCS' Utilization Management solution and staff to extract data for analysis.
The solution should provide an open interface to enable Office of Inspector General (OIG) staff to extract data for auditing purposes.
Support
System Management
The solution should support IETF Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) traps as a mechanism for event notification.
The solution should support IETF Syslog as a mechanism for logging. 
The solution should support remote monitoring and administration via Netscape Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), IETF Secure Shell (SSH), IETF IP Security (IPSEC) or similar secure method.
The solution should monitor COTS-provided components & services.
The solution should support alerts for defined thresholds and errors.
The solution should provide a system management console.
The solution should support alert notifications via email.
The solution should support alert notifications via pager.
The solution should provide a browser interface for monitoring and administration.
The solution should include GUI tools for monitoring of processes and errors.
The solution should include a command line interface to allow automation of system processes (e.g. service startup, service shutdown).
Documentation
The support manual should provide the information necessary to service and maintain an operational system or component throughout its life cycle. A support manual includes the associated hardware and software and procedures for servicing, repairing, or reprogramming it.
The installation manual should provide the information necessary to install a system, set initial parameters, and prepare the system or component for operational use.
The operator manual must provide the information necessary to initiate and operate a system. The operator manual includes procedures for preparation, operation, monitoring, and recovery.
The programmer manual must provide the information necessary to develop or modify software for a given computer system. The programmer manual includes equipment configuration, operational characteristics, programming features, input/output features, and compilation or assembly features of the computer system.
The diagnostic manual must provide the information necessary to execute diagnostic procedures for a system, identify malfunctions, and remedy those malfunctions. The diagnostic manual includes diagnostic features of the system and diagnostic tools available for its support.
The solution should include documentation that describes the patch (hot-fix) handling process the vendor will use for EHR (eRx), operating system and underlying tools (e.g. a specific web site for notification of new patches, an approved patch list, special instructions for installation, and post-installation test).
The solution should include documentation that explains system error or performance messages to users and administrators, with the actions required.
The solution should include documentation of product capacities (e.g. number of users, number of transactions per second, number of records, network load, etc.) and the baseline representative configurations assumed for these capacities (e.g. number or type of processors, server/workstation configuration and network capacity, etc.).
The solution should include documented procedures for product installation, start-up and/or connection.
The solution should include documentation that describes the steps needed to confirm that the system installation was properly completed and that the system is operational.
Requirement Statement

The solution should conform to function IN.1.1 (Entity Authentication).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.2 (Entity Authorization).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.3 (Entity Access Control).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.5 (Non- Repudiation), to guarantee that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.6 (Secure Data Exchange), to ensure that the data are protected.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.7 (Secure Data Routing), to ensure that the exchange occurs only among authorized senders and receivers.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.8 (Information Attestation), to show authorship and responsibility for the data.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.9 (Patient Privacy and Confidentiality).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.1 (Data Retention, Availability and Destruction).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.3 (Synchronization).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.4 (Extraction of Health Record Information), to support data extraction across the complete health record of an individual.
The solution should conform to function IN.2.5.1 (Manage Unstructured Health Record Information), to ensure data integrity through all changes.
The solution should conform to function IN.2.5.2 (Manage Structured Health Record Information), to ensure data integrity through all changes.
The solution should conform to function IN.3 (Registry and Directory Services).
The solution should conform to function IN.4.1 (Standard Terminologies and Terminology Models), to support semantic interoperability.
The solution should conform to function IN.4.2 (Maintenance and Versioning of Standard Terminologies), to preserve the semantics of coded data over time.
The solution should conform to function IN.4.3 (Terminology Mapping).
The solution should conform to function IN.5.1 (Interchange Standards), to support interoperability.
The solution should conform to function IN.5.2 (Interchange Standards Versioning and Maintenance), to accommodate the inevitable evolution of interchange standards.
The solution should conform to function IN.5.3 (Standards-based Application Integration).
The solution should conform to function IN.5.4 (Interchange Agreements), to define how the sender and receiver will exchange data.
The solution should conform to function IN.6 (Business Rules Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.7 (Workflow Management).
The solution should conform to function S.2.2.1 (Health Record Output).
Record Management
Identify and Maintain a Patient Record
The solution should create a single logical record for each patient.
The solution should provide the ability to create a record for a patient when the identity of the patient is unknown.
The solution should provide the ability to store more than one identifier for each patient record.
The solution should associate key identifier information (e.g., solution ID, medical record number) with each patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to uniquely identify a patient and tie the record to a single patient.
The solution should provide the ability, through a controlled method, to merge or link dispersed information for an individual patient upon recognizing the identity of the patient.
If health information has been mistakenly associated with a patient, then the solution should provide the ability to mark the information as erroneous in the record of the patient in which it was mistakenly associated and represent that information as erroneous in all outputs containing that information.
If health information has been mistakenly associated with a patient, THEN the solution should provide the ability to associate it with the correct patient.
The solution should provide the ability to retrieve parts of a patient record using a primary identifier, secondary identifiers, or other information which are not identifiers, but could be used to help identify the patient.
The solution should provide the ability to obsolete, inactivate, nullify, destroy and archive a patient's record in accordance with local policies and procedures, as well as applicable laws and regulations.
If related patients register with any identical data, then the solution should provide the ability to propagate that data to all their records.
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Manage Patient Demographics
The solution should capture demographic information as part of the patient record.
The solution should store and retrieve demographic information as discrete data.
The solution should provide the ability to retrieve demographic data as part of the patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to update demographic data.
The solution should provide the ability to report demographic data.
The solution should store historical values of demographic data over time.
The solution should present a set of patient identifying information at each interaction with the patient record.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Data and Documentation from External Sources
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Capture Data and Documentation from External Clinical Sources
The solution should provide the ability to capture external data and documentation.
If lab results are received through an electronic interface, then the solution should receive and store the data elements into the patient record.
If lab results are received through an electronic interface, then the solution should display them upon request.
The solution should provide the ability to receive, store and display scanned documents as images.
The solution should provide the ability to store imaged documents or reference the imaged documents via links to imaging solutions.
The solution should provide the ability to receive, store and present text-based externally-sourced documents and reports.
The solution should provide the ability to receive, store and display clinical result images (such as radiologic images) received from an external source.
The solution should provide the ability to receive, store and display other forms of clinical results (such as wave files of EKG tracings) received from an external source.
The solution should provide the ability to receive, store and present medication details from an external source.
The solution should provide the ability to receive, store and present structured text-based reports received from an external source.
The solution should provide the ability to receive, store and present standards-based structured, codified data received from an external source.
Capture Patient-Originated Data
The solution should capture and explicitly label patient-originated data.
If the solution provides the ability for direct entry by the patient, then the solution should explicitly label the data as patient entered.
The solution should capture and label the source of clinical data provided on behalf of the patient.
The solution should present patient-originated data for use by care providers.
The solution should provide the ability for a provider to verify the accuracy of patient-originated data for inclusion in the patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to view or comment, but not alter, patient-originated data.
Capture Patient Health Data Derived from Administrative and Financial Data and Documentation
The solution should provide the ability to capture and label patient health data derived from administrative or financial data.
The solution should provide the ability to capture and link data about the source of patient health data derived from administrative and financial data with that patient data.
The solution should provide the ability to present labeled patient health information derived from administrative or financial data and the source of that data for use by
authorized users.
The solution should provide the ability to view or comment on patient health information derived from administrative or financial data.
The solution should provide the ability to request correction of the administrative or financial data.
Produce a Summary Record of Care
The solution should present summarized views and reports of the patient’s comprehensive EMR.
The solution should include at least the following in the summary: problem list, medication list, allergy and adverse reaction list.
The solution should conform to function S.3.3.6 (Health Service Reports at the Conclusion of an Episode of Care).
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Present Ad Hoc Views of the Health Record
The solution should provide the ability to create views that prohibit patients from accessing certain information according to organizational policy, scope of practice, and jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to create customized views of summarized information based on sort and filter controls for date or date range, problem, or other clinical parameters.
The solution should provide the ability to access summarized information through customized views based on prioritization of chronology, problem, or other pertinent clinical parameters.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Patient History
The solution should provide the ability to capture, update and present current patient history including pertinent positive and negative elements.
The solution should provide the ability to capture and present previous external patient histories
The solution should provide the ability to capture the relationship between patient and others.
The solution should capture the complaint, presenting problem or other reason(s) for the visit or encounter.
The solution should capture the reason for visit/encounter from the patient's perspective.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Preferences, Directives, Consents, and Authorizations
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Manage Patient and Family Preferences
The solution should provide the ability to capture, present, maintain and make available for clinical decisions patient preferences such as language, religion, spiritual practices and culture.
The solution should provide the ability to capture, present, maintain and make available for clinical decisions family preferences such as language, religion, spiritual practices and culture.
The solution should conform to function DC.2.1.4 (Support for Patient and Family Preferences), and incorporate patient and family preferences into decision support solutions.
Manage Patient Advance Directives
The solution should provide the ability to indicate that advance directives exist for the patient.
The solution should provide the ability to indicate the type of advance directives completed for the patient such as living will, durable power of attorney, preferred interventions for known conditions, or the existence of a "Do Not Resuscitate order”.
The solution should provide the ability to capture, present, maintain and make available for clinical decisions patient advance directives documents and “Do Not Resuscitate” orders.
The solution should conform to function DC.1.1.3.1 (Capture Data and Documentation from External Clinical Sources) and capture scanned patient advance directive documents and “Do Not Resuscitate” orders.
The solution should provide the ability to indicate when advanced directives were last reviewed.
The solution should provide the ability to indicate the name and relationship of the party completing the advance directive for the patient.
The solution should time and date stamp advance directives.
The solution should provide the ability to document the location and or source of any legal documentation regarding advance directives.
The solution should conform to function DC.2.1.4 (Support for Patient and Family Preferences).
Manage Consents & Authorizations
The solution should provide the ability to indicate that a patient has completed applicable consents and authorizations.
The solution should provide the ability to indicate that a patient has withdrawn applicable consents and authorizations.
The solution should conform to function DC.1.1.3.1 (Capture Data and Documentation from External Clinical Sources) and capture scanned paper consent and authorization documents.
The solution should provide the ability to view and complete consent and authorization forms on-line.
The solution should provide the ability to generate printable consent and authorization forms.
The solution should display the authorizations associated with a specific clinical activity, such as treatment or surgery, along with that event in the patient's electronic chart.
The solution should provide the ability to display consents and authorizations chronologically.
The solution should provide the ability to document an assent for patients legally unable to consent.
The solution should provide the ability to document the source of each consent, such as the patient or the patient’s personal representative if the patient is legally unable to provide it.
The solution should provide the ability to document the patient’s personal representative’s level of authority to make decisions on behalf of the patient.
Summary Lists
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Manage Allergy, Intolerance, and Adverse Reaction List
The solution should provide the ability to capture true allergy, intolerance, and adverse reaction to drug, dietary or environmental triggers as unique, discrete entries.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the reason for entry of the allergy, intolerance or adverse reaction.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the reaction type.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the severity of a reaction.
The solution should provide the ability to capture a report of No Known Allergies (NKA) for the patient.
The solution should provide the ability to capture a report of No Known Drug Allergies (NKDA) for the patient.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the source of allergy, intolerance, and adverse reaction information.
The solution should provide the ability to deactivate an item on the list.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the reason for deactivation of an item on the list.
The solution should present allergies, intolerances and adverse reactions that have been deactivated.
The solution should provide the ability to display user defined sort order of list.
The solution should provide the ability to indicate that the list of medications and other agents has been reviewed.
The solution should provide the ability to capture and display the date on which allergy information was entered.
The solution should provide the ability to capture and display the approximate date of the allergy occurrence.
Manage Medication List
The solution should provide the ability to capture patient specific medication lists.
The solution should display and report patient-specific medication lists.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the details of the medication such as ordering date, dose, route, and SIG (description of the prescription, such as the quantity) when known.
The solution should provide the ability to capture other dates associated with medications such as start and end dates.
The solution should provide the ability to capture medications not reported on existing medication lists or medication histories.
The solution should provide the ability to capture nonprescription medications including over the counter and complementary medications such as vitamins, herbs and supplements.
The solution should present the current medication lists associated with a patient.
The solution should present the medication history associated with a patient.
The solution should present the medication, prescriber, and medication ordering dates when known.
The solution should provide the ability to mark a medication as erroneously captured and excluded from the presentation of current medications.
The solution should provide the ability to print a current medication list for patient use.
The solution should provide the ability to capture information regarding the filling of prescriptions (dispensation of medications by pharmacies or other providers).
Manage Problem List
The solution should capture, display and report all active problems associated with a patient.
The solution should capture, display and report a history of all problems associated with a patient.
The solution should provide the ability to capture onset date of problem.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the chronicity (chronic, acute/self-limiting, etc.) of a problem.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the source, date and time of all updates to the problem list.
The solution should provide the ability to deactivate a problem.
The solution should provide the ability to re-activate a previously deactivated problem.
The solution should provide the ability to display inactive and/or resolved problems.
The solution should provide the ability to manually order/sort the problem list.
The solution should provide the ability to associate encounters, orders, medications, notes with one or more problems.
Manage Immunization List
The solution should capture, display and report all immunizations associated with a patient.
The solution should record as discrete data elements data associated with any immunization given including date, type, lot number and manufacturer.
The solution should prepare a report of a patient ‘s immunization history upon request for appropriate authorities such as Public Health organization.
Manage Assessments
The solution should provide the ability to create assessments.
The solution should provide the ability to use standardized assessments where they exist.
The solution should provide the ability to document using standard assessments germane to the age, gender, developmental state, and health condition as appropriate to the EMR user’s scope of practice.
The solution should provide the ability to capture data relevant to standard assessment.
The solution should provide the ability to capture additional data to augment the standard assessments relative to variances in medical conditions.
The solution should provide the ability to link data from a standard assessment to a problem list.
The solution should provide the ability to link data from a standard assessment to an individual care plan.
The solution should provide the ability to link data from external sources, laboratory results, and radiographic results to the standard assessment.
The solution should provide the ability to compare documented data against standardized curves and display trends.
The solution should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Care Plans, Treatment Plans, Guidelines, and Protocols
Present Guidelines and Protocols for Planning Care
The solution should provide the ability to present current guidelines and protocols to clinicians who are creating plans for treatment and care.
The solution should provide the ability to search for a guideline or protocol based on appropriate criteria (such as problem).
The solution should provide the ability to present previously used guidelines and protocols for historical or legal purposes.
The solution should conform to function DC.1.8.6 (Manage Documentation of Clinician Response to Decision Support Prompts).
The solution should conform to function DC.2.2.1.2 (Support for Context-Sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols).
The solution should should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Manage Patient-Specific Care & Treatment Plans
The solution should provide the ability to capture patient specific plans of care and treatment.
The solution should conform to DC.1.6.1 (Present Guidelines and Protocols for Planning Care) and provide the ability to use locally or non-locally developed templates, guidelines, and protocols for the creation of patient-specific plans of care and treatment.
The solution should provide the ability to use previously developed care plans as a basis for the creation of new plans of care and treatment.
The solution should provide the ability to track updates to a patient’s plan of care and treatment including authors, creation date, version history, references, local sources
and non-local sources in accordance with scope of practice, organizational policy and jurisdictional law.
The solution should provide the ability to coordinate order sets with care plans.
The solution should provide the ability to derive order sets from care plans.
The solution should provide the ability to derive care plans from order sets.
The solution should provide the ability to transfer plans of care and treatment to other care providers.
The solution should conform to function DC.3.1.1 (Clinical Task Assignment and Routing) and incorporate care plan items in the tasks assigned and routed.
The solution should conform to function DC.3.1.2 (Clinical Task Linking) and incorporate care plan items in the tasks linked.
The solution should conform to function DC.3.1.3 (Clinical Task Tracking) and incorporate care plan items in the tasks tracked.
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Orders & Referrals
The solution should to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Manage Medication Orders
The solution should provide the ability to create prescription or other medication orders with the details adequate for correct filling and administration captured as discrete data.
The solution should capture user and date stamp for all prescription related events.
The solution should conform to function DC.1.4.2 (Manage Medication List) and update the appropriate medication list with the prescribed medications (in case of multiple medication lists).
The solution should provide a list of medications to search, including both generic and brand name.
The solution should provide the ability to maintain a discrete list of orderable medications.
The solution should conform to function DC.1.7.2.1 (Manage Non-Medication Patient Care Orders) and provide the ability to order supplies associated with medication orders in accordance with scope of practice, organizational policy or jurisdictional law.
The solution should make common content available for prescription details to be selected by the ordering clinician.
The solution should provide the ability for the ordering clinician to create prescription details as needed.
The solution should make available common patient medication instruction content to be selected by the ordering clinician.
The solution should provide the ability to include prescriptions in order sets.
The solution should provide a list of frequently-ordered medications by diagnosis by provider which could include the full details of the medication, including SIG, quantity,
refills, DAW, etc.
The solution should provide the ability to select drugs by therapeutic class and/or indication.
The solution should conform to function S.3.3.2 (Eligibility Verification and Determination of Coverage) and display the results of electronic prescription eligibility and health plan/payer formulary checking.
The solution should provide the ability to re-prescribe medication by allowing a prior prescription to be reordered without re-entering previous data (e.g. administration schedule, quantity).
The solution should provide the ability to re-prescribe a medication from a prior prescription using the same dosage but allow for editing of details adequate for correct
filling and administration of medication (e.g. dose, frequency, body weight).
The solution should conform to function DC.2.3.1.1 (Support for Drug Interaction Checking) and check and report allergies, drug-drug interactions, and other potential adverse reactions, when new medications are ordered.
The solution should conform to function DC.2.3.1.2 (Support for Patient Specific Dosing and Warnings) and check and report other potential adverse reactions, when new medications are ordered.
The solution should provide the ability to create prescriptions in which the weight-specific dose is suggested.
The solution should conform to function DC.2.3.1.3 (Support for Medication Recommendations).
Non-Medication Orders & Referrals Management
Manage Non-Medication Patient Care Orders
The solution should provide the ability to capture nonmedication patient care orders for an action or item.
The solution should provide the ability to capture adequate order detail for correct order fulfillment.
The solution should track the status of the ordered action or item.
The solution should provide the ability to capture patient instructions necessary for correct order fulfillment.
The solution should provide the ability to present patient instructions necessary for correct order fulfillment.
The solution should provide the ability to communicate the order to the correct recipient(s) for order fulfillment.
The solution should conform to DC.2.4.2 (Support for Non- Medication Ordering).
Manage Orders for Diagnostic Tests
The solution should provide the ability to capture orders for diagnostic tests.
The solution should provide the ability to capture adequate order detail for correct diagnostic test fulfillment.
The solution should provide the ability to track the status of diagnostic test(s).
The solution should provide the ability to capture and present patient instructions relevant to the diagnostic test ordered.
The solution should communicate orders to the service provider of the diagnostic test.
The solution should communicate supporting detailed documentation to the correct service provider of the diagnostic test.
The solution should conform to DC.2.4.2 (Support for Non-Medication Ordering).
Manage Orders for Blood Products & Other Biologics
The solution should provide the ability to interface with solutions of blood banks or other sources to manage orders for blood products or other biologics.
The solution should provide the ability to capture use of such products in the provision of care.
The solution should to function S.1.1 (Registry Notification).
Manage Referrals
The solution should provide the ability to capture and communicate referral(s) to other care provider (s), whether internal or external to the organization.
The solution should provide the ability to capture clinical details as necessary for the referral.
The solution should provide the ability to capture administrative details (such as insurance information, consents and authorizations for disclosure) as necessary for the referral.
The solution should present captured referral information.
The solution should provide the ability to capture completion of a referral appointment.
The solution should provide diagnosis based clinical guidelines for making a referral.
The solution should provide order sets for referral preparation.
The solution should provide the ability to document transfer of care according to organizational policy, scope of practice, and jurisdictional law.
Manage Order Sets
The solution should provide the ability to present order set(s).
The solution should provide the ability to order at the patient level from presented order sets.
The solution should provide the ability to record each component of an order set that is ordered.
The solution should conform to function DC.2.4.1 (Support for Order Sets).
The solution should provide the ability for a provider to choose from among the order sets pertinent to a certain disease or other criteria.
Documentation of Care, Measurements, and Results
The solution should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Manage Medication Administration
The solution should present the list of medications to be administered.
The solution should display the timing, route of administration, and dose of all medications on the list.
The solution should display instructions for administration of all medications on the list.
The solution should notify the clinician when specific doses are due.
The solution should conform to function DC.2.3.1.1 (Support for Drug Interaction Checking) and check and report allergies, drug-drug interactions, and other potential adverse reactions, when new medications are about to be given.
The solution should conform to function DC.2.3.1.2 (Support for Patient Specific Dosing and Warnings) and check and report other potential adverse reactions, when new medications are about to be given.
The solution should provide the ability to capture medication administration details: including timestamps, observations, complications, and reason if medication was not given - in accordance with organizational policy, scope of practice, and jurisdictional law.
The solution should securely relate interventions to be administered to the unique identity of the patient.
Manage Immunization Administration
The solution should provide the ability to recommend required immunizations, and when they are due, during an encounter based on widely accepted immunization schedules.
The solution should provide the ability to recommend required immunizations based on patient risk factors.
The solution should perform checking for potential adverse or allergic reactions for all immunizations when they are about to be given.
The solution should provide the ability to capture immunization administration details, including date, type, lot number and manufacturer.
The solution should provide the ability to capture other clinical data pertinent to the immunization administration (e.g. vital signs).
The solution should record as discrete data elements data associated with any immunization.
The solution should provide the ability to associate standard codes with discrete data elements associated with an immunization.
The solution should provide the ability to update the immunization schedule.
The solution should provide the ability to prepare a report of a patient‘s immunization history upon request for appropriate authorities such as Public Health departmetn.
The solution should conform to function DC.1.4.1 (Manage Allergy, Intolerance and Adverse Reaction Lists).
The solution should transmit required immunization information to a public health immunization registry.
The solution should receive immunization histories from a public health immunization registry.
Manage Results
The solution should provide the ability to present numerical and non-numerical current and historical test results to the appropriate provider.
The solution should provide the ability to filter results for a unique patient.
The solution should provide the ability to filter results by factors that supports results management, such as type of test and date range.
The solution should indicate normal and abnormal results depending on the data source.
The solution should provide the ability to filter lab results by range, e.g. critical, abnormal or normal.
The solution should display numerical results in flow sheets, graphical form, and allow comparison of results.
The solution should the ability to group tests done on the same day.
The solution should notify relevant providers (ordering, copy to) that new results have been received.
The solution should provide the ability for the user, to whom a result is presented, to acknowledge the result.
The solution should provide the ability to route results to other appropriate care providers, such as nursing home, consulting physicians, etc.
The solution should route results to patients by methods such as phone, fax, electronically or letter.
The solution should provide the ability for providers to pass on the responsibility to perform follow up actions to other providers.
The solution should provide the ability for an authorized user to group results into clinically logical sections.
The solution should trigger decision support algorithms from the results.
The solution should link the results to a specific order.
The solution should provide the ability for providers to annotate a result.
The solution should display a link to an image associated with results.
Manage Patient Clinical Measurements
The solution should capture patient vital signs such as blood pressure, temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and severity of pain as discrete elements of structured or unstructured data.
The solution should capture psychiatric symptoms and daily functioning as structured or unstructured data
The solution should capture other clinical measures such as peak expiratory flow rate, size of lesions, oxygen saturation, height, weight, and body mass index as discrete elements of structured or unstructured data.
The solution should compute and display percentile values when data with normative distributions are entered.
The solution should provide normal ranges for data based on age and other parameters such as height, weight, ethnic background, gestational age.
Manage Clinical Documentation & Notes
The solution should provide the ability to capture clinical documentation (henceforth "documentation") including original, update by amendment in order to correct, and addenda.
The solution should provide the ability to capture free text documentation.
The solution should present documentation templates (structured or free text) to facilitate creating documentation.
The solution should provide the ability to view other documentation within the patient's logical record while creating documentation.
The solution should provide the ability to associate documentation for a specific patient with a given event, such as an office visit, phone communication, e-mail consult, lab result, etc.
The solution should provide the ability to associate documentation with problems and/or diagnoses.
The solution should provide the ability to update documentation prior to finalizing it.
The solution should provide the ability to finalize a document or note.
The solution should provide the ability to attribute record and display the identity of all users contributing to or finalizing a document or note, including the date and time of entry (see appropriate criteria in IN.2.2 (Auditable Records)).
The solution should present captured documentation.
The solution should provide the ability to filter, search or sort notes.
The solution should provide documentation templates for data exchange.
Manage Documentation of Clinician Response to Decision Support Prompts
The solution should provide the ability to capture clinical decision support prompts and user decisions to accept or override those prompts.
The solution should provide the ability to record the reason for variation from the decision support prompt.
The solution should provide the ability to display recorded variances upon request by authorized users of the EMR.
Generate & Record Patient-specific instructions
The solution should provide the ability to generate instructions pertinent to the patient for standardized procedures.
The solution should provide the ability to generate instructions pertinent to the patient based on clinical judgment.
The solution should provide the ability to include details on further care such as follow up, return visits and appropriate timing of further care.
The solution should provide the ability to record that instructions were given to the patient.
The solution should provide the ability to record the actual instructions given to the patient or reference the document(s) containing those instructions.
The Generate & Record Patient-Specific Instructions should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records) requirements.

The Clinical Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN.1.1 (Entity
Authentication) requirements.
The Clinical Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN.1.2 (Entity
Authorization) requirements.
The Clinical Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records)  requirements.
The Clinical Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN.1.3 (Entity
Access Control) requirements.
The Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.1.5 (Non-repudiation), to guarantee that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data, if the solution is used to enter, modify or exchange data.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.1.7 (Secure Data Routing), to ensure that the exchange occurs only among authorized senders and receivers.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.1.8 (Information Attestation), to show authorship and responsibility for the data.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.2.1 (Data
Retention, Availability and Destruction).
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.2.3 (Synchronization).
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.2.4 (Extraction of Health Record Information), to support data extraction across the complete health record
of an individual.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.2.5.1 (Manage
Unstructured Health Record Information), to ensure data integrity through all changes.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.2.5.2 (Manage Structured Health Record Information), to ensure data integrity through all changes.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.4.1 (Standard Terminologies and Terminology Models), to support semantic interoperability.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.4.2 (Maintenance and Versioning of Standard Terminologies), to preserve the semantics of coded data over time.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.4.3 (Terminology Mapping) requirements.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.5.1 (Interchange Standards), to support interoperability.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.5.2 (Interchange Standards Versioning and Maintenance), to accommodate the inevitable evolution of interchange standards.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to conform to function IN.5.3
(Standards-based Application Integration) requirements.
The  Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.5.4 (Interchange Agreements), to define how the sender and receiver will exchange data, if the solution exchanges data with other solutions outside itself.
The Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.1.9 (Patient Privacy and Confidentiality) requirements.
The Clinical Decision Support capability should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records) requirements.
Manage Health Information to Provide Decision Support
The Manage Health Information to Provide Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN 1.4 (Patient Access Management) requirements.
The Manage Health Information to Provide Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN.1.9 (Patient Privacy and Confidentiality) requirements.
The Manage Health Information to Provide Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records)  requirements.
The Manage Health Information to Provide Decision Support capabilities should conform to function IN.3 (Registry and Directory Services) requirements.
Support for Standard Assessments
The solution should provide the ability to access the standard assessment in the patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to access to health standards and practices appropriate to the EMR user’s scope of practice.
The solution should provide the ability to compare elements of assessments captured by the clinician and those available as best practices and/or evidence based resources.
The solution should provide the ability to derive supplemental assessment data from evidence based standard assessments, practice standards, or other generally accepted, verifiable, and regularly updated standard clinical sources.
The solution should provide prompts based on practice standards to recommend additional assessment functions.
The Support for Standard Assessments capability should conform to function DC.1.4.3 (Manage Problem List) requirements and provide the ability to update the problem list by activating new problems and deactivating old problems as identified by conduct of standard assessments.
The solution should provide the ability to create standard assessments that correspond to the problem list.
The Support for Standard Assessments capability should conform to function DC 2.1.2
(Support for Patient Context-driven Assessments) requirements.
Support for Patient-Driven Assessments
The solution should provide the ability to access health assessment data in the patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to compare assessment data entered during the encounter and the accessed health evidence based standards and best practices.
The solution should provide the ability to compare health data and patient context-driven assessments to practice standards in order to prompt additional testing, possible diagnoses, or adjunctive treatment.
The solution should provide the ability to correlate assessment data and the data in the patient specific problem list.
The Support for Patient-Driven Assessments should conform to function DC 2.1.1 (Support
for Standard Assessments) requirements.
The Support for Patient-Driven Assessments should conform to function DC.1.5 (Manage
Assessments) requirements.
The Support for Patient-Driven Assessments should conform to function DC.1.4.3
(Manage Problem List) requirements.
Support for Identification of Potential Problems & Trends
The Support for Identification of Potential Problems & Trends capability should conform to conform to function DC.1.5 (Manage Assessments) requirements and provide the ability to access standard assessment data in the patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to access health standards and practices appropriate to the EMR user’s scope of practice at the time of the encounter.
The solution should provide the ability to compare patient context-driven assessments and additional health information to best practices in order to identify patient specific growth or development patterns, health trends and potential health problems.
The solution should provide the ability to configure rules defining abnormal trends.
The solution should prompt the provider with abnormal trends.
The solution should prompt the provider for additional assessments, testing or adjunctive treatment.
The Support for Identification of Potential Problems & Trends capability should conform to function DC.1.8.6 (Manage Documentation of Clinician Response to Decision Support Prompts). requirements.
The solution should provide the ability to integrate health information contained in the record with appropriate teaching materials.
The Support for Identification of Potential Problems & Trends capability should conform to function DC 2.2.1.2 (Support for Context-sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols) requirements.
Support for Patient and Family Preferences
The Support for Patient and Family Preferences capability should conform to function DC.1.3.1 (Manage Patient and Family Preferences).
The solution should provide for the ability to capture and manage patient and family preferences as they pertain to current treatment plans.
The solution should provide the ability to update care guidelines and options relating to documented patient and family preferences, including standards of practice e.g. treatment options for individuals who refuse blood transfusions.
The solution should provide the ability to compare care guidelines and options relating to documented patient and family preferences, including standards of practice.
The solution should prompt the provider for testing and treatment options based on patient and family preferences and provide the ability to compare to standard practice
The solution should provide the ability to integrate preferences with appropriate teaching materials.
The solution should provide the ability to integrate necessary documentation of preferences, such as living wills, specific consents or releases
The Support for Patient and Family Preferences capability should conform to function DC.1.3.2 (Manage Patient Advance Directives).
Care and Treatment Plans, Guidelines and Protocols
The Care and Treatment Plans, Guidelines and Protocols capability should conform to function IN.1.9 (Patient Privacy and Confidentiality).
The Care and Treatment Plans, Guidelines and Protocols capability should conform to function IN.2.2 (Auditable Records).
Support for Condition Based Care and Treatment Plans, Guidelines, Protocols
The Support for Condition Based Care and Treatment Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The Support for Condition Based Care and Treatment Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to function IN.3 (Registry and Directory Services).
Support for Standard Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols
The Support for Standard Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to function DC.1.6.1 (Present Guidelines and Protocols for Planning Care) and provide the ability to access standard care plans, protocols and guidelines when requested within the context of a clinical encounter.
The solution should provide the ability to create and use site specific care plans, protocols, and guidelines.
The solution should provide the ability to make site-specific modifications to standard care plans, protocols, and guidelines obtained from outside sources.
The solution should identify, track and provide alerts, notifications and reports about variances from standard care plans, guidelines and protocols.
The Support for Standard Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to DC.2.2.1.2 (Support for Context-Sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols) requirements.
The Support for Standard Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to DC.2.1.1 (Support for Standard Assessments) requirements.
Support for Context- Sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols
The solution should provide the ability to access care and treatment plans that are sensitive to the context of patient data and assessments.
The solution should provide the ability to capture care processes across the continuum of care.
The solution should present care processes from across the continuum of care.
The solution should provide the ability to document the choice of action in response to care plan suggestions.
The solution should identify, track and provide alerts, notifications and reports about variances from standard care plans, guidelines and protocols.
The Support for Context-Sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to DC 2.2.1.1 Support for Standard Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols.
The Support for Context-Sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to DC 2.1.1 Support for Standard Assessments.
The Support for Context-Sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols capability should conform to DC 2.1.2 Support for Patient Context-Driven Assessments.
Support Consistent Healthcare Management of Patient Groups or Populations
The Support Consistent Healthcare Management of Patient Groups or Populationscapability should conform toDC 2.2.1 Support for Context-Sensitive Care Plans, Guidelines, Protocols requirements.
The solution should provide the ability to identify patients eligible for healthcare management protocols based on criteria identified within the protocol.
The solution should provide the ability to include or exclude a patient from an existing healthcare management protocol group.
The solution should provide the ability to audit compliance of selected populations and groups that are the subjects of healthcare management protocols.
The Support Consistent Healthcare Management of Patient Groups or Populations capability should conform to S 2.2.2 Standard Report Generation requirements.
The Support Consistent Healthcare Management of Patient Groups or Populations capability should conform to IN 3 Registry & Directory Services requirements.
Support for Research Protocols Relative to Individual Patient Care
The solution should provide the ability to present protocols for patients enrolled in research studies.
The solution should provide the ability to maintain research study protocols.
The Support for Research Protocols Relative to Individual Patient Care capability should conform to function S.3.3.1 (Enrollment of Patients), to enable participation in research studies.
The solution should provide the ability to identify and track patients participating in research studies.
The solution should provide the ability to capture appropriate details of patient condition and response to treatment as required for patients enrolled in research studies.
The Support for Research Protocols Relative to Individual Patient Care capability should conform to function S.2.2.2 (Standard Report Generation).
The Support for Research Protocols Relative to Individual Patient Care capability should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The Support for Research Protocols Relative to Individual Patient Care capability should conform to function IN.3 (Registry and Directory Services) if research protocols require standardized transmission of data to/from a registry or directory.
Support Self-Care
The solution should provide the ability to present patient guidance and reminders appropriate for self-management of clinical conditions.
The solution should provide the ability to manage and/or develop patient guidance and reminders related to specific clinical conditions.
The Support Self-Care capability should conform to function DC.1.1.3.2 (Capture of Patient Originated Data).
The Support Self-Care capability should conform to function DC.1.3.1 (Manage Patient and Family Preferences).
The Support Self-Care capability should conform to function IN.1.4 (Patient Access Management).
The Support Self-Care capability should conform to function IN.3 (Registry and Directory Services).
Medication & Immunization Management
The Medication & Immunization Management capabilities should conform to the IN 1.9 Patient Privacy & Confidentialty requirements.
The Medication & Immunization Management capabilities should conform to the IN 2.2 Auditable Records requirements.
The Medication & Immunization Managementcapabilities should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Support for Medication & Immunization Ordering
Support for Drug Interaction Checking
The solution should check for and alert providers to interactions between prescribed drugs and medications on the current medication list.
The solution should relate medication allergies to medications to facilitate allergy checking decision support for medication orders.
The solution should provide the ability to document that a provider was presented with and acknowledged a drug interaction warning.
The solution should provide the ability to prescribe a medication despite alerts for interactions and/or allergies being present.
The solution should provide the ability to set the severity level at which warnings should be displayed.
The solution should provide the ability to check for duplicate therapies.
The solution should provide the ability to check medications against a list of drugs noted to be ineffective for the patient in the past.
The solution should identify contraindications between a drug and patient conditions at the time of medication ordering.
Support for Patient Specific Dosing & Warnings
The solution should provide the ability to identify an appropriate drug dosage range, specific for each known patient condition and parameter at the time of medication ordering.
The solution should provide the ability to automatically alert the provider if contraindications to the ordered dosage range are identified.
The solution should provide the ability for the provider to override a drug dosage warning.
The solution should provide the ability to document reasons for overriding a drug alert or warning at the time of ordering.
The solution should compute drug doses, based on appropriate dosage ranges, using the patient’s body weight.
The solution should provide the ability to specify an alternative “dosing weight” for the purposes of dose calculation.
The solution should perform drug dosage functions using any component of a combination drug (e.g., acetaminophen-hydrocodone).
The solution should provide the ability to record the factors used to calculate the future dose for a given prescription.
Support for Medication Recommendations
The Support for Medication Recommendations capability should conform to function DC 2.3.1.2 (Support for Patient-Specific Dosing and Warnings) requirements.
The solution should present recommendations for medication regimens based on findings related to the patient diagnosis.
The solution should present alternative treatments in medications on the basis of practice standards, cost, formularies, or protocols.
The solution should present suggested lab monitoring as appropriate to a particular medication.
The Support for Medication Recommendations capability should conform to function IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
Support for Medication and Immunization Administration
The solution should present information necessary to correctly identify the patient and accurately administer medications and immunizations such as patient name, medication name, strength, dose, route and frequency.
The solution should alert providers to potential administration errors such as wrong patient, wrong drug, wrong dose, wrong route and wrong time as it relates to medication and immunizations administration.
The solution should alert providers to potential medication administration errors at the point of medication administration.
The solution should provide the ability to capture all pertinent details of the medication administration including medication name, strength, dose, route, time of administration, exceptions to administration, and administrator of the medication.
The solution should capture the administrator of the immunization and the immunization information identified in DC.1.8.2 (Manage Immunization Administration), Conformance Criteria #4 (The solution should provide the ability to capture immunization administration details, including date, type, lot number and manufacturer).
The solution should generate documentation of medication or immunization administration as a by-product of verification of patient, medication, dose, route and time.
The solution should prompt or remind providers regarding the date/time range for timely administration of medications.
The solution should suggest alternative administration techniques based on age, developmental stage, weight, physiological status, mental status, educational level, and
past physical history of the patient. 
The Support for Medication and Immunization Administration capability should conform to DC 2.7.1 Access Healthcare Guidance and provide the ability for a provider to access drug monograph information.
Orders, Referrals, Results & Care Management
Create Order Set Templates
The solution should provide the ability to create order set templates.
The solution should provide the ability to maintain order set templates, including version control.
The solution should provide the ability to create order set templates from provider input.
The solution should capture order sets based on patient data that should be provided by the provider or that should be in accordance with preferred standards.
The solution should provide the ability to create order set templates for known conditions for a particular disease.
The solution should present the order set templates to the provider.
The solution should record the basis of the practice standards or criteria for the creation of the order set templates.
The solution should provide the ability to relate order set templates to aid decision support for certain diseases.
The Create Order Set Templates capability should conform to DC 1.7.3 Manage Order Sets requirements.
Support for Non-Medication Ordering
The solution should identify required order entry components for non-medication orders.
The solution should present an alert at the time of order entry, if a non-medication order is missing required information.
The solution should present an alert via warnings of orders that should be inappropriate or contraindicated for specific patients at the time of provider order entry.
The Support for Non-Medication Ordering capability should conform to S 3.3.3 Service Authorization requirements.
Support for Result Interpretation
The solution should present alerts for a result that is outside of a normal value range.
The solution should provide the ability to trend results.
The solution should provide the ability to evaluate pertinent results at the time of provider order entry (such as evaluation of lab results at the time of ordering a radiology exam).
Support for Referrals
Support for referral Process
The solution should to include clinical and administrative data (e.g. insurance information) as part of the referral process.
The solution should to include test and procedure results with a referral.
The solution should to include standardized or evidence based protocols with the referral.
The solution should allow clinical, administrative data, and test and procedure results to be transmitted to the referral clinician.
The Support for Referral Process should conform to S 2.2.1 Health Record Output requirements.
Support for Referral Recommendations
The solution should present recommendations for potential referrals based on diagnosis(es).
The solution should present recommendations for potential referrals based on patient condition (e.g. for smoking cessation counseling if the patient is prescribed a medication to support cessation).
The Support for Referral Recommendations capabilities should conform to the IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
Support for Care Delivery
Support for Safe Blood Administration
The solution should present information necessary to correctly identify the patient and accurately administer blood products including patient name, blood product number, amount, route, product expiration date and time of administration.
The solution should capture validation of the correct matching of the patient to the blood product.
The solution should capture the blood product number, amount, route and time of administration.
The Support for Safe Blood Administration capability should conform to DC 1.8.4 manage Patient Clinical Measurements and capture the blood pressure, temperature, pulse, respirations of the patient receiving the product.
The Support for Safe Blood Administration capability should conform to S 2.2.1 Health Record Output requirements.
Support for Accurate Specimen Collection
The solution should provide the ability to present information necessary to correctly identify the patient and accurately identify the specimen to be collected including, but not limited to, patient name, specimen type, specimen source, means of collection, date and time.
The solution should report variation between the type of specimen order placed and actual specimen received.
The solution should present the details of specimen collection.
The Support for Accurate Specimen Collection capability should conform to S 2.2.1 Health Record Output requirements.
The solution should notify the provider in real-time of a variation between the type of specimen order placed and the actual specimen received.
Support for Health Maintenance: Preventative Care & Wellness
The Support for Health Maintenance: Preventative Care & Wellness capabilities should conform to the IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
The Support for Health Maintenance: Preventative Care & Wellness capabilities should conform to the IN 1.9 Patient Privacy & Confidentialty requirements.
The Support for Health Maintenance: Preventative Care & Wellness capabilities should conform to the IN 2.2 Auditable Records requirements.
The Support for Health Maintenance: Preventative Care & Wellness capabilities should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Present Alerts for Preventative Services and Wellness
The solution should provide the ability to establish criteria for the identification of preventive care and wellness services based on patient demographics (e.g. age, gender).
The solution should provide the ability to modify the established criteria that trigger the alerts.
The solution should present recommended preventative or wellness services needed based upon clinical test results.
The solution should present alerts to the provider of all patient specific preventive services that are due.
The solution should provide the ability to produce a list of all alerts along with the scheduled date and time for the preventive service.
The solution should provide the ability to produce a history of all alerts that were generated for the patient in the record.
Notifications and Reminders for Preventative Services and Wellness
The solution should generate timely notifications to patients including services, tests or actions that are due or overdue.
The solution should capture a history of notifications.
The solution should provide the ability to track overdue preventive services.
The solution should provide notification of overdue preventative services in the patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to configure patient notifications (such as repetitions or timing of the activity).
The solution should provide the ability to update content of notifications, guidelines, reminders and associated reference materials.
The solution should provide the ability to manage the lifecycle of the states of the notifications and reminders.
Support for Population Health
The Support for Population Health capabilities should conform to the IN 1.9 Patient Privacy & Confidentialty requirements.
The Support for Population Health capabilities should conform to the IN 2.2 Auditable Records requirements.
Support for Epidemiological Investigations of Clinical Health Within a Population
The solution should provide the ability to to aggregate patient information based on user-identified criteria.
The solution should apply local privacy and confidentially rules when assembling aggregate data to prevent identification of individuals by unauthorized parties.
The solution should provide the ability to to use any demographic or clinical information as criteria for aggregation.
The solution should present aggregate data in the form of reports for external use.
The solution should provide the ability to save report definitions for later use.
The solution should present aggregate data in an electronic format for use by other analytical programs.
The solution should provide the ability to to derive statistical information from aggregate data.
The Support for Epidemiological Investigations of Clinical Health Within a Population capabilities should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements if biosurveillance or other epidemiological investigations require standardized transmission of data to/from a registry or directory.
Support for Notification & Response
The solution should provide the ability to identify individual care providers or care managers within a cared for population.
The solution should provide the ability to prepare a response notification to the care providers or care managers.
The solution should provide the ability to the ability to capture notification of a health risk within a cared-for population from public health authorities or other external authoritative sources as either free-text or a structured message.
The solution should provide the ability to coordinate with local and national programs to disseminate notifications of health risk to individual care providers or care-managers.
The solution should provide the ability to notify patients, directly or indirectly, who are described by the health risk alert.
The solution should present suggestions to the care provider indicating an appropriate course of action.
The solution should provide the ability to to notify public health authorities or other external authoritative sources of a health risk within a cared for population in accordance
with scope of practice, organizational policy and jurisdictional law.
The Support for Notification & Responsecapabilities should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Support for Monitoring Response Notifications Regarding a Specific Patient's Health
The solution should present specific actions to be taken at the patient level for a health risk alert.
The solution should notify appropriate care providers of specific patient actions required by a health risk alert.
The solution should provide the ability to identify those patients who have not received appropriate action in response to a health risk alert.
The solution should provide the ability to to report on the omission of an appropriate response to the health risk alert in specific patients.
The Support for Monitoring Response Notifications Regarding a Specific Patient's Health capabilities should conform to the IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
The Support for Monitoring Response Notifications Regarding a Specific Patient's Health capabilities should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Support for Knowledge Access
The Support for Knowledge Access capabilities should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Access Healthcare Guidance
The solution should provide the ability to access evidencebased healthcare recommendations, with documentation of sources
The solution should provide the ability to access evidenced-based documentation appropriate for the care provider to render a timely judgment.
The solution should provide the ability to access external evidence-based documentation.
The Access Healthcare Guidance capabilities should conform to the DC 2.2.1.1 Support for Standard Care Plans, Guidelines, and Protocols requirements.
The Access Healthcare Guidance capabilities should conform to the IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
Patient Knowledge Access
The solution should provide the ability to access information about wellness, disease management, treatments, and related information that is relevant for a specific patient.
The solution should provide the ability to access information related to a health question directly from data in the health record or other means such as key word search.
The solution should provide the ability to access patient educational information from external sources.
The solution should provide the ability to identify links specific to information if the information is external-based.
The Patient Knowledge Access capabilities should conform to the IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
The Patient Knowledge Access capabilities should conform to the IN 1.9 Patient Privacy & Confidentialty requirements.
The Patient Knowledge Access capabilities should conform to the IN 2.2 Auditable Records requirements.

The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 1.1 Entity Authentication requirements.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 1.2 Entity Authorization requirements.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 1.3 Entity Access Control requirements.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 1.6 Secure Data Exchange requirements when solution data exchanges cross entity boundaries within the EMR or external to the EMR to ensure that the data are protected.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 1.7 Secure Data Routing requirements when solution data exchanges with other sources or destinations of data to ensure that the exchange occurs only among authorized senders and receivers.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 1.8 Information Attestation requirements when the EMR is used to enter or modify data in the health record to show authorship and responsibility for the data.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 1.9 Patient Privacy & Confidentialty requirements.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 2.1 Data Retention, Availability, & Destruction requirements.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 2.2 Auditable Records requirements.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 2.3 Synchronization requirements.
The Operations Management & Communication capabilities should conform to the IN 2.4 Extraction of Health Record Information requirements when used to extract data for analysis and reporting to support data extraction across the complete health record for an individual.
Clinical Workflow Tasking
Clinical Task Assignment & Routing
The solution should provide the ability for users to create manual clinical tasks.
The solution should provide the ability to automate clinical task creation.
The solution should provide the ability to manually modify and update task status (e.g. created, performed, held, canceled, pended, denied, and resolved).
The solution should provide the ability to manually modify and update task status (e.g. created, performed, held, canceled, pended, denied, and resolved).
The solution should provide the ability to automatically modify or update the status of tasks based on workflow rules.
The solution should provide the ability to assign, and change the assignment of, tasks to individuals or to clinical roles.
The solution should provide the ability to manage workflow task routing to multiple individuals or roles in succession and/or in parallel.
The solution should provide the ability to prioritize tasks based on urgency assigned to the task.
The solution should provide the ability to restrict task assignment based on appropriate role as defined by the entity.
The solution should provide the ability to escalate clinical tasks as appropriate to ensure timely completion.
The Clinical Task Assignment & Routing capability should provide non-repudiation requirements (IN 1.5) that guarantees that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
The Clinical Task Assignment & Routing capability should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Clinical Task Linking
Thesolution should provide the ability to link a clinical task to the component of the HER required to complete the task.
The Clinical Task Tracking capability should provide non-repudiation requirements (IN 1.5) that guarantees that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
Clinical Task Tracking
The solution should provide the ability to track the status of tasks.
The solution should provide the ability to notify providers of the status of tasks.
The solution should provide the ability to sort clinical tasks by status.
The solution should provide the ability to present current clinical tasks as work lists.
The solution should provide the ability to define the presentation of clinical task lists.
The Clinical Task Tracking capability should provide non-repudiation requirements (IN 1.5) that guarantees that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
The Clinical Task Tracking capability should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Support Clinical Communication
The Support Clinical Communication capabilities should conform to IN.3 Registry and Directory Services requirements.
Support for Inter-Provider Communication
The solution should provide the ability to document in the patient record verbal/telephone communication between providers.
The solution should leverage the CCHCS eUHR solution to incorporate scanned documents from external providers into the patient record.
The solution should provide the ability to communicate using real-time messaging.
The solution should provide the ability to communicate clinical information (e.g. referrals) via email or other electronic means.
The solution should provide the ability to transmit electronic multi-media data types representing pictures, sound clips, or video as part of the patient record.
The Inter-Provider Communication capability should provide non-repudiation requirements (IN 1.5) that guarantees that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
Support for Provider - Pharmacy Communication
The solution' Provider - Pharmacy Communication capability should support DC 1.7.1 Manage Medication Orders requirements and provide the ability to order medications.
The solution should electronically communicate orders between the prescriber, provider and pharmacy, as necessary, to initiate, change, or renew a medication order.
The solution should receive any acknowledgements, prior authorizations, renewals, inquiries and fill notifications provided by the pharmacy or other participants in the
electronic prescription and make it available for entry in the patient record. 
The solution should provide the ability to electronically communicate current realm-specific standards to pharmacies.
The solution should provide the ability for providers and pharmacies to communicate clinical information via e-mail or other electronic means, on both general and specific
orders.
The solution should provide the ability to use secure realtime messaging.
The solution should provide the ability to include workflow tasks as part of communication to the provider.
The Provider - Pharmacy Communication capability should provide non-repudiation requirements (IN 1.5) that guarantees that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
Support for Communications between Provider and Patient and/or the Patient Representative
The solution should provide the ability to capture documentation of communications between providers and patients and/ or the patient representatives.
The solution should leverage the CCHCS eUHR solution to incorporate scanned documents.
The solution should provide the ability to document communication originating with the patient or patient representative (e.g. date, entity, details of communication).
The solution should provide the ability to communicate between providers and patients or their representative using a secure internet connection.
The solution should provide the ability to manage documentation regarding family member or patient representative authorizations to receive patient related
health information.
The solution should alert providers to the presence of patient or patient representative originated communications.
The solution should provide the ability to to alert patients or patient representative to provider absences (e.g. vacations) and recommend rerouting of the information or
request.
The solution should provide the ability to to notify providers of events and new treatment options.
The solution should provide the ability to remind the patient or patient representative of events related to their care (e.g. upcoming appointments) as agreed upon by the
patient and/or the patient representative.
The Support for Communications between Provider and Patient and/or the Patient Representative capability should conform to the IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
The Support for Communications between Provider and Patient and/or the Patient Representative capability should provide non-repudiation requirements (IN 1.5) that guarantees that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
Patient, Family and Care Giver Education
The solution should provide the ability to access to a library of educational material for health concerns, conditions, and/or diagnosis.
The solution should provide the ability to to communicate applicable educational materials to the patient and/or patient representative.
The solution should provide the ability to deliver multilingual educational material.
The solution should provide the ability to to deliver patient
educational materials using alternative modes to accommodate patient sensory capabilities.
The solution should provide the ability to access to external
educational materials.
The solution should provide the ability to use rules-based support to identify the most pertinent educational material, based on the patient health status, condition and/or diagnosis.
The solution should provide the ability to to document who received the educational material provided, the patient, or the patient representative.
The solution should provide the ability to to document that the
educational material was reviewed with the patient and/or patient representative and their comprehension of the material.
The solution should provide the ability to identify age appropriate
and/or reading-ability appropriate educational materials for the patient and/or patient representative.
The solution should provide the ability for direct access to the educational material available, by patients and/or patient representatives.
The Patient, Family, & Care Giver Education capability should conform to the IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
The Patient, Family, & Care Giver Education capability should provide non-repudiation requirements (IN 1.5) that guarantees that the sources and receivers of data cannot deny that they entered/sent/received the data.
Communication with Medical Devices
The solution should provide the ability to collect accurate electronic data from medical devices according to realm-specific applicable regulations and/or requirements.
The solution should provide the ability to present information collected from medical devices as part of the medical record as appropriate.
The Communications with Medical Devices capability should conform to  IN 1.4 Patient Access Management requirements.
Requirement Statement

The solution should provide the ability to capture a list of the patient's specialized medical equipment and each prosthetic, orthotic, or implantable device.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the reason for the specialized medical equipment and each prosthetic, orthotic, or implantable device.
The solution should provide the ability to capture the specific type of specialized medical equipment, prosthetic, orthotic, or implantable device.
The solution should provide the ability to capture in a discrete field that the patient has No Known specialized medical equipment or prosthetic, orthotic, or implantable device for the patient.
The solution should provide the ability to capture information necessary to identify and track the equipment/device as discrete entries. Such information may include, but is not limited to: type, manufacturer, manufacture date, date implanted (or placed into
The solution should provide the ability to delete or inactivate the documentation of the specialized medical equipment or prosthetic, orthotic, or implantable devices.
The solution should provide the ability to present a list of the deleted inactivated/discontinued specialized medical equipment or prosthetic, orthotic, or implantable devices and reason for deletion.
The solution should provide the ability to electronically receive and maintain relevant clinical data captured by telemedicine devices in the patient’s home.

The solution should provide the ability to generate reports of clinical and administrative data using either internal or external reporting tools.
The solution should provide the ability to generate reports consisting of all or part of an individual patient’s medical record (e.g. patient summary).
The solution should provide the ability to generate reports regarding multiple patients (e.g. diabetes roster).
The solution should provide the ability to access reports outside the EHR application.
The solution should provide the ability to specify report parameters (sort and filter criteria) based on patient demographic and clinical data (e.g., all male patients over 50 that are diabetic and have a HbA1c value of over 7.0, or that are on a certain med
The solution should provide the ability to produce reports based on the absence of a clinical data element (e.g., a lab test has not been performed or a blood pressure has not been measured in the last year).
The solution should provide the ability to save report parameters for generating subsequent reports.
The solution should provide the ability to modify one or more parameters of a saved report specification when generating a report using that specification.

The solution should provide the ability to define one or more reports as the formal health record for disclosure purposes.
The solution should provide the ability to generate hardcopy or electronic output of part or all of the individual patient's medical record.
The solution should provide the ability to generate hardcopy and electronic output for an identified individual by date and/or date range.
The solution should provide the ability to create hardcopy and electronic report summary information (procedures, medications, labs, immunizations, allergies, and vital signs).
The solution should provide the ability to support for disclosure management in compliance with HIPAA and applicable law.
The solution should provide the ability to include patient identifying information, as well as time and date report printed, on each page of individual patient-specific reports generated.
The solution should provide the ability to export structured data which removes those identifiers listed in the HIPAA definition of a limited dataset.  This export on hardcopy and electronic output should leave the actual PHI data unmodified in the original record.

The solution should receive and store general laboratory results (including the ability to differentiate preliminary results and final results and the ability to process a corrected result) using the HL7 v.2.5.1 ORU message standard.
The solution should receive and store microbiology laboratory results with organisms recorded as free-text.
The solution should receive and store microbiology laboratory results with sensitivity testing coded using LOINC.
The solution should send an electronic prescription to pharmacy.
The solution should respond to a request for a resupply to the pharmacy.
The solution should send a query to verify prescription drug insurance eligibility and apply response to formulary and benefit files to determine coverage.
The solution should capture and display formulary information from pharmacy or PBM (Pharmacy Benefits Manager) by applying eligibility response.
The solution should send a query for medication history to PBM or pharmacy to capture and display medication list from the HER.
The solution should display HITSP C32/CCD documents and file them as intact documents in the HER.  Summary patient record content information will include: patient demographics, medication list, and medication allergy list.
The solution should generate and format patient summary  documents per the following specifications: HITSP C32 (v2.3 or v2.5). Summary patient record content information will include: patient demographics, medications, and medication allergies.
Requirement Statement

The solution should provide the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate facilities including  housing units. 
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including intermediate and acute care facilities e.g.  licensed hospitals and licensed psychiatric hospital.
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including an emergency department. 
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including long term care/rehabilitation/skilled nursing facilities e.g. licensed elderly care unit, in-patient psychiatric facilities, a hospice unit for AIDS/HIV or terminally ill inmates.
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including outpatient medical clinics. 
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including outpatient dental clinics.
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including Reception Centers.
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including intermediate care mental health.
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including correctional treatment center (CTC).
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including intermediate care mental health.
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including inpatient surgery facilities.
The solution should support the prescribing and ordering, order communication, dispensing, administration, monitoring, formulary and inventory requirements of different types of inmate care facilities including outpatient surgery facilities.

The solution should support the entering and verification of medication orders.
The solution should provide and interface download from an Offender Management System.
The solution should provide and bi-direction interface to Interface to the EMR using HL7 messaging standard.
The solution should provide an interface to the Central Fill Automation system.
The solution should accept the transmission of prescription data from the EMR's ePrescribing solution.
The solution should accept the transmission of prescription data from CPOE systems.
The solution should accept the transmission of prescription data from EMR systems.
The solution should interface with CPOE systems.
The solution should interface with EHR/EMR systems.
The solution should have a robust CPOE functionality.
The solution should provide the use of a third party database (e.g., American Druggist Bluebook, "DPIF" Drug Product Information File, Medispan, Micromedex).
The solution should provide prescription imaging to capture  prescription orders as electronic images and to link images to the inmate record.
The solution should utilize a rules-based engine that automatically sends scanned order images to the appropriate work list/queue for processing. 
If faxing is utilized, then the scanned image should go directly into the pharmacy system and into the appropriate order entry work queue.
The solution should provide separate fields for 3rd party approval codes (such as is needed for non-formulary approval), allowing for days supply and quantity limitations.
The solution should provide imaging to capture non-formulary approvals as electronic images and to link images to the prescription order within the inmate record.
The  imaging function should utilize a rules based engine and workflow queues to support prescription & order entry.
The solution should allow allergies, weight, and body surface area be entered during order entry.
The solution should display allergies during the order entry and refill process. The information includes all reactions and dates of reaction including those that are classifiable as a true allergy, intolerance, side effect or other adverse reaction to drug, dietary or environmental triggers. Notations indicating whether item is inmate reported and/or provider verified are maintained.
The solution should support the medication reconciliation process by providing on-line and paper-based access to an inmate profile  that allows the staff to see all active, inactive medications for the inmate, as well as any documented allergies. The physician and nursing staff can use these reports to renew, discontinue,  or change existing prescription orders, or to write new prescriptions. 
The solution should display additional inmate information during the order entry process.
The solution should display clinical information (medical/dental) during the order entry process.
The solution should show available laboratory test data during order processing.
The solution should provide access to laboratory data for re-evaluating lab data each time medication is dispensed.
The solution should provide mechanisms for incorporating external clinical data and documentation (including identification of source) as image documents attached to the inmate record.
The solution should allow the rejection of medication ordering and/or dispensing based upon out-of-range lab data.
The solution should provide real time multi-level clinical decision support (for all routes) on the front end of order entry.
The solution should automatically check for drug-fluid compatibility during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for drug-drug interaction (for all routes) during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for drug-lab interaction (for all routes) during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for drug-food interaction (for all routes) during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for drug-procedure interaction (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for drug-lactation precaution (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for drug-pregnancy precaution (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide dose range checking by age (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide dose range checking by weight  (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide dose range checking by disease state  (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide interaction screening for drug duplicates  (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide interaction screening for therapeutic duplicates  (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide alerts that indicate the medication is not vegetarian  (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide alerts for short man/tall man (for all routes) during the order entry process.
The solution should provide alerts for sound alike and look alike drugs (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should provide alerts for user-configured business rules (for all routes)  during the order entry process.
The solution should help prevent medication errors by using current JCAHO, ISP, and other widely accepted standards.
The solution should allow CCHCS to prioritize / rank the importance of the interaction and/or warning.
The solution should support the on-line acknowledgement of alerts with override control by authorized users.
The solution should provide an audit trail whenever an interaction is overridden.
The solution should support a reason for an alert override based on CCHCS criteria and/or alert level e.g. allows alerts to be customized according to the level of severity.
The solution should allow alerts to be customized according to CCHCS criteria.
The solution should provide documentation of medication errors and adverse drug reactions.
The solution should automatically suspend order processing and provide on-line notification if any interaction occurs.
The solution should allow interactions to be overridden depending on user's security level.
The solution should provide checking for levels of interaction severity.
The solution should provide on-line pharmacokinetic dosing/assessment.
The solution should automatically check for max/min doses per body weight or body surface area during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for maximum fluid rate during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically check for inappropriate administration schedule (e.g., TID for extend release) during the order entry process.
The solution should automatically display side effects during the order entry process.
The solution should display termination date and time of current orders during the order entry process.
The solution should support dose calculations for "odd doses".
The solution should provide on-line programs for vasopressor calculations and flow sheets.
The solution should provide entry of parole/release orders.
The solution should provide on-line entry of tapered orders.
The solution should provide on-line entry of alternating orders.
The solution should provide on-line entry of non-formulary orders.
The solution should provide on-line entry of floor stock orders.
The solution should provide on-line entry of physician standing order sets.
The solution should provide standing order functionality with unlimited number of Meds, IV/LVP, IVPB, etc.
The solution should provide standing order functionality with separate pre-defined fields for all orders.
The solution should provide standing order functionality with compound orders such as a profile composed of separate formulary items.
The solution should provide standing order functionality defined by user mnemonics.
The solution should provide standing order functionality with fractional/multiple dose profiling.
The solution should provide entry of IV/LVP orders including alternating orders.
The solution should provide entry of IV/LVP orders including chemotherapeutic agents.
The solution should provide entry of IV/LVP orders including syringes.
The solution should provide entry of IV/LVP orders including irrigation solutions.
The solution should automatically test for maximum/minimum doses per body weight or body surface area during the order entry process.
The solution should support automatic calculations for total volume of order during the order entry process.
The solution should support automatic calculations infusion rate of order during the order entry process.
The solution should support automatic calculations of total bags/bottles to be administered per time period during the order entry process.
The solution should support nutritional assessment of IV/LVP orders.
The solution should allow for dosage by the hour or bottle IV entry method.
The solution should allow for frequency by hour or bottle IV entry method.
The solution should allow for alternating IV entry method.
The solution should allow for labels set to drip rate IV entry method.
The solution should allow for automatic profiling IV entry method.
The solution should provide the ability to schedule IV/LVP for extended time periods.
The solution should provide the ability to accurately calculate IV/LVP hang times when revising dates.
The solution should provide the ability to add IV/LVP according to alternating solutions.
The solution should provide the ability to add IV/LVP according to SIG.
The solution should provide the ability to add IV/LVP according to route.
The solution should provide the ability to add IV/LVP according to note.
The solution should provide the ability to add IV/LVP according to rate.
The solution should provide the ability to add IV/LVP according to volume.
The solution should provide the ability to add IV/LVP according to solution and additives.
The solution should allow on-line entry of, and updates to, inmate medication profiles from non-pharmacy locations (for example; in the ED, Psychiatric Ward, etc).
The solution should automatically assign prescription control numbers and maintain a prescription number list.
The solution should provide long  and short term skilled nursing facility needs such as flexible physician's orders
The solution should maintain list of all staff physicians and include their DEA number.
The solution should maintain list of all staff physicians and include their Medical license number.
The solution should maintain list of all staff physicians and include their state certificate.
The solution should provide physician order entry of prescriptions.
The solution should display clinical protocols and on-demand printing of protocols.
The solution should provide a TPN/hyperalimentation program (calculation of doses, interactions, pre-set criteria, labels nutritional summary).
The solution should provide piggyback of orders/order explosion.
The solution should provide chemotherapy orders.
The solution should provide ordering of investigational medications.
The solution should provide chemotherapy orders entered by open volume of fluids based on additives.
The solution should provide chemotherapy orders entered by calculation checks body surface area.
The solution should provide chemotherapy orders entered by calculation checks body surface area.
The solution should handle differing dosage of same medication at different times of the day both from an issue and medication administration.
The solution should handle alternating IV's and the appropriate shifting of these IV's for rate adjustment.
The solution should handle TPN's (hyperals) with 18 additives and 24 hour days.
The solution should display medications that have been modified based on inmate's preferences e.g. will only take small blue tablet.
The solution should allow order entry of orders from a centralized location for a single location (institution).
The solution should allow order entry of orders from multiple decentralized locations for a single location (institution).
The solution should allow order entry of orders from a centralized location for multiple locations (institutions).
The solution should provide alerts/reminders when departing from inmate-specific formulary.
The solution should calculate pharmacokinetic parameters for designated drugs.
The solution should support tracking of inmate preferences related to diet, language, religion, spiritual practices and  culture are available  at the point of prescribing and ordering 
The solution should provide rules and alerts related to diet, language, religion, spiritual practices and  culture during the order entry process.
The solution should support order sets based on provider, or other preferences. 
The solution should capture and display the preferences of the inmate (e.g. reluctance to use an antibiotic or specific brand of medication).
The solution should support the ability to indicate prescription status as pill line, nurse observed, medication cart, keep on person,  or other CCHCSspecified status.
The solution should support entering a medication order for a future start date.
The solution should support entering a medication order or a future stop date.
The solution should support putting an order "On Hold" by the pharmacist and tracks the "On Hold" medication based on CCHCScriteria.
The solution should have the ability to interact with clinical problem list when the problem list is codified.

The solution should support medication lists including capturing all pertinent dates, including medication start, modification, and end dates are stored.
The solution should provide view of the entire medication history for any medication, including alternative supplements and herbal medications for authorized users.
The solution should provide HIPAA secure two-way on-line communication capability between the pharmacy and physicians, nurses and other clinicians.
The solution should provide the documentation of such secure two-way on-line communication exchanges and provide ability to associate the communication with a specific inmate's record.
The solution should allow the user to defer verification or modification of orders and facilitate secured two-way online communication with the physician or nurse regarding the verification status. 
The solution should allow standard and free form pharmacy notes to be entered.
The solution should provide automated workflow in the distribution process with sequenced orders that guide staff through emergency, high-priority, routine, and batch order fulfillment.
The solution should provide messaging capability notification for instant alert of interventions.
The solution should provide messaging capability notification for instant alert of adverse drug reactions.
The solution should provide messaging capability notification for instant alert of medication errors.
The solution should provide medication reconciliation via the communicating of information to the next provider(s) of care at each transition (e.g., change of location, setting, service, level of care, provider).
The solution should provide the automated discontinue of medications when an inmate is released or deceased.

This solution should allow dispensing to be performed by a variety of methods e.g. by NDC, patient, facility, building, administration method, etc.
The solution should use bar code readers for dispensing functions and ensures prescriptions are filled accurately by comparing the NDC on the prescription label against the product being dispensed.  
The solution's barcode checking functionality should allow the pharmacy technician or pharmacist  to select another NDC with the same GSN classification from the available inventory (brand-swap).  The brand-swap occurs in the background, the patient record is updated and a new prescription label is printed.  
The solution should require that the new prescription label be barcode-checked before the product can be dispensed.  
The solution should maintain and display inmate medication profiles on-line for a CCHCS specified number of days after release
The solution should support unit dose distribution method.
The solution should support traditional distribution method.
The solution should support floor stock distribution method.
The solution should support refilling of medication orders, including deducting from and tracking of number of refills.
The solution should allow nurses to request prescription refills and the solution validates refill availability and queues refill for filling.
The solution should allow the pharmacist to "push" a refill when there are no more refills.  The system captures the reason for the "refill push" and the pharmacist requesting the refill.
The solution should provide requesting a refill for a medication that can't be refilled until some date in the future. 
The solution should update cart "fill lists" with all types of orders entered (e.g., new, refill, PRN's, suspends, etc.).
The solution should reprint medication and IV "fill lists" and/or labels without recharging a inmate.
The solution provides on-line generation of dose user-defined labels.
The solution should generate batch labels for batch medication dispensing by medication and inventory on demand by authorized user.
The solution should automatically determine location of label printing (e.g., satellite vs. main pharmacy) based on inmate classification and/or location.
The solution should provide immediate printing of all STAT IV admixture requisitions.
The solution should provide immediate printing of all stop/discontinue IV Admixture requisitions.
The solution should provide the ability to set IV label batch prints at pre-defined time periods.
The solution should store prescription refill information on-line and support automatic refill processing.
The solution should provide appropriate "cautionary" information for auxiliary labeling.
The solution should print labels automatically or on demand for prescription orders.
The solution should provide the ability to refill multiple prescriptions from a single profile.
The solution should provide the ability to refill multiple prescriptions from multiple profiles.
The solution should provide long  and short term skilled nursing facility needs including flexible distribution methods.
The solution should provide automatic prescription price comparisons.
The solution should print labels for controlled drug floor stock issues that include serial number.
The solution should print labels for controlled drug floor stock issues that include nursing location.
The solution should print labels for controlled drug floor stock issues that include drug, strength, form.
The solution should print labels for controlled drug floor stock issues that include location (e.g., to be placed on drug box, floor stock sheets, and receipt forms).
The solution should print labels for multi-dose controlled drugs.
The solution should print medication cart filling list that support daily fill e.g. for hospital, SNF setting.
The solution should print stock labels on demand or at a specified time.
The solution should print stock labels with pertinent item data including lot number and expiration date or preparation time.
The solution should provide order prioritization (STAT orders print first).
The solution should support batch order filling at user-defined time periods.
The solution should have a standard bi-directional  interfaces with administration systems e.g. smart pumps, etc.
The solution should provide instrument interfaces to unit dose packaging equipment.
The solution should have a standard bi-directional  interfaces with  automated  preparation and dispensing technologies such as automated dispensing cabinets, robotic IV automation devices, and automated packaging systems.  
The solution should have a standard interface to a send required medication data to a variety of EHR's or CDR for access by clinicians involved in the inmate’s care. Information could include medication lot number, expiration date, and quantity dispensed.
The interfaced solutions should send notifications to the Pharmacy system regarding medication dispensed.
The  interfaced solutions should send notifications to the Pharmacy system regarding medication returned.
The  interfaced solutions should send notifications to the Pharmacy system regarding machine load/unload.
The  interfaced solutions should send notifications to the Pharmacy system regarding inventory count.
The solution must should notifications to the dispensing machine regarding medications ordered for the inmate, and new/deleted drug dictionary entries.
The solution should provide a link between medication administration and dispensing to manage inventories on the location level.
The solution should provide a link between medication administration and dispensing to manage inventories on the site level.
The solution should provide a link between medication administration and dispensing to manage inventories on the facility level.
The solution should provide a link between medication administration and dispensing to manage inventories on the enterprise level.
The solution should record withdrawal of medication from automated dispensing technology to inmate profile  and make available for drug interaction checking.
The solution should provide on-line generation of dose volume labels at order entry.
The solution should provide the ability to print labels in other languages besides English
The solution should provide dual language sigs; with ability to automatically print both languages based on languages entered into The solutions.
The  solution should support providing specific medication instructions for a parole which can be scanned and attached to inmate's record/profile.
The solution should support manifests to track prescriptions to a particular yard, pod, or cell within a prison and generates the manifest reports used in the distribution of prescriptions throughout the facility.  
The solution should support the pharmacist verification of all  medications prior to their being dispensed. 
The solution should provide a Receipt of Medications document for parole medications which can be scanned and attached to inmate's record/profile.
The solution should provide an override function (that requires a reason and the pharmacist's user ID) to dispense a non-authorized/non-formulary medication in special circumstances.  
The solution should permit the partial dispensing of medication for an order and will prompt the pharmacy at the appropriate time of the need to send more medication to complete the order.
The  solution should support a replacement function for lost or stolen meds that doesn't reduce the number of remaining refills.
The solution should provide a report of medications which are due to expire for provider review and renewal.

The solution should use bar code readers for the manifest function.
The solution should perform edit checks during the manifesting process to confirm that the medication has been verified, barcode checked, validates that the patient is in the building being manifested, and to ensure that Rx has not be associated with a different manifest.
The solution should provide the option to use bar code readers for medication administration functions.  
The solution should support medication administration records (MARs) and allow updates.
The solution should provide the ability to view MARs in ancillary or interfaced systems.
The solution should display and/or print inmate MARs.
The solution should print an inmate's MAR on demand or at a specified time.
The solution should provide status of orders on-line.
The solution should provide a method of updating and distributing MARs that limits and/or reduces the amount of paperwork received by the nurses.
The solution should provide flexibility in printing and distributing MARs to the nurses e.g. All insulin MARs are printed and distributed by location of where the insulin in dispensed - not the location of the inmate.
The solution should allow an authorized user to set up and maintain rules for that automate the printing and distribution of MARs based on CCHCS criteria.
The solution should allow an authorized user  to design and change the format and information contain on the MARs on a CCHCS as-needed basis.   
The solution should have a robust electronic Medication Administration (eMAR) functionality with the ability to bar code scan a medication against what was ordered and at the same time bar code verify that it is being administered to the correct patient.
The solution should provide automatic assignment of scheduled dosing times (based on CCHCS specifications).
The solution should automatically adjust dosage times when inmate transfers nursing units/facility/etc. based on the CCHCS defined parameters for the locations.
The solution should track and display order status e.g. order completed, order not found, order on hold, order in process, etc.
The solution should provide drug order status of hard/soft stop.
The solution should provide drug order status of active.
The solution should provide drug order status of suspend.
The solution should provide drug order status of hold.
The solution should provide drug order status of cancelled.
The solution should provide drug order status of conditional.
The solution should provide drug order status of reinstated.
The solution should allow routine or one-time orders.
The solution should provide special order scheduling.
The solution should provide default SIGs.
The solution should include a message function for communication with doctors, nurses, etc.
The solution should automatically provide a prescription received signature form, according to inmate type as specified by CPHCS.
The solution should provide long and short term skilled nursing facility  needs such as customized MARs.
The solution should list available outstanding proof-of-use forms sorted by use and/or drug.
The solution should provide QA (drug utilization evaluation, adverse drug reaction, concurrent reporting) functionality and maintains data for a CPHCS-defined period of time.
The solution should generate inmate release medication summary.
The solution should have the capabilities to link NDC's for generically equivalent drugs for the purpose of scanning at inmate administration.
The solution should allow interdepartmental charges by par levels, requesting areas, and usage patterns.
The solution should maintain records of medication instructions for inmates.
The solution should support documentation and update of inmate specific immunization lists with the ability to capture details of immunizations administered including date, type, manufacturer and lot number.

The solution should display medication and doses since initial orders including suspended and discontinued orders during the order entry process.
The solution should support Medication Error Reporting to create and track incident reports whenever an error occurs related to the fulfillment of a prescription.
The solution should provide STAT medication daily report.
The solution should provide medication on hold or discontinued in a daily report.
The solution should provide automatic stop order in a daily report.
The solution should provide list of all interactions occurring and the action taken (e.g. overrides) to including pharmacist identification in a daily report.
The solution should track controlled substance usage.
The solution should provide controlled substances report by nursing station, inmate and/or physician in a daily report.
The solution should provide alphabetical listing of all controlled substances sorted by DEA classification and their usage levels.
The solution should provide list of all requests for missing doses in a daily report.
The solution should generate and print an inmate's medication/charge summaries during discharge processing.
The solution should generate and print a list of inmates (in house or paroled) for drug utilization by medication.
The solution should generate and print a list of inmates (in house or paroled) for drug utilization by diagnosis.
The solution should generate and print a list of inmates (in house or paroled) for drug utilization by drug class.
The solution should generate and print a list of inmates (in house or paroled) for drug utilization by physician.
The solution should generate and print a list of inmates (in house or paroled) for drug utilization by medical specialty of physician.
The solution should provide the ability to chart medication and IV administration on-line.
The solution should maintain and display inmate/inmate medication profiles.
The solution should provide daily log of vault activity.
The solution should provide drug utilization tracking by drug, dose, diagnosis, age/weight, and physician.
The solution should maintain records of inspections by pharmacy personnel of nursing, stock and other locations.
The solution should generate reports of workload statistics on preparation of oral solids, oral liquids, IVs, chemotherapy, and number of orders listed by area/location.
The solution should generate reports of workload statistics on preparation of oral solids, oral liquids, IVs, chemotherapy, and number of orders listed by pharmacist.
The solution should generate reports of workload statistics on preparation of oral solids, oral liquids, IVs, chemotherapy, and number of orders listed by shift.
The solution should generate reports of workload statistics on preparation of oral solids, oral liquids, IVs, chemotherapy, and number of orders listed by other attributes.
The solution should track adverse drug reactions.
The solution should provide the ability to track clinical interventions.
The solution should support the recording of an intervention by the pharmacist, what
drugs were involved, steps of action taken by the pharmacist, and possible effects.
The solution should provide the ability to chart medication and IV administration on-line.
The solution should maintain and display inmate/inmate medication profiles.
The solution should allow a user to report on clinical interventions by intervention category.
The solution should track errors and drug reactions using audit trails, reporting, and documentation.
The solution should restrict validation of orders to authorized personnel only.
The solution should provide a log of all unverified orders in a daily report.
The solution should provide a log of all verified orders by verifier in a daily report.
The solution should maintain inmate specific interactions for the pharmacy and will automatically generate reports for follow up on day scheduled for intervention follow up.
The solution should provide the ability to document clinical interventions, adverse reactions, and progress notes all within the single order processing area.

The solution should allow electronic and manual updating of the formulary.
The solution should provide the ability to maintain/display the formulary with pertinent data by authorized personnel.
The solution should maintain pharmacy formulary that includes dosage form (e.g., tablet, oral, liquid, injection) for each medication.
The solution should maintain pharmacy formulary that includes dispensing form (e.g., ampoule, vial, syringe) for each medication.
The solution should maintain pharmacy formulary that includes generic drug name (or trade name for combination products) for each medication.
The solution should maintain pharmacy formulary that includes trade name(s) or synonyms for each medication.
The solution should maintain pharmacy formulary that includes American Hospital Formulary Service Number for each medication.
The solution should maintain pharmacy formulary that includes therapeutic class name for each medication.
The solution should maintain pharmacy formulary that includes CCHCS-defined attributes for each medication  (i.e., formulary code, generic name, trade name, NDC, and AHFS number, etc.).
The solution should allow user-defined formulary items to be added by authorized personnel.
The solution should accept electronic updates of therapeutics, dosing, interaction and financial data for the drugs in the formulary.
The solution should provide frequent on-line updates of the vendor-provided formulary.
The solution should allow multiple concurrent formularies.
The solution should provide on-line formulary lookup using Soundex search method.
The solution should provide formulary building and maintenance with ease of use.
The solution provides a pre-populated formulary using First Data Bank or  other vendor.
The solution should not require system downtime for formulary maintenance.
The solution should not limit system functionality during formulary maintenance.
The solution should provide designation of vitamins, minerals, etc. on the formulary.
The solution should allow automatic substitution of drugs by authorized users.
The solution should provide alerts whenever a substitution of drugs has occurred.
The solution should allow an authorized user to flag a medication as "Do not substitute"  e.g. substitution never allowed for  the no sugar/no alcohol mouthwash.  
The solution should provide display of compound medications within the formulary.
The solution should provide designation of natural/homeopathic on the formulary.
The solution should provide designation of clinical trails on the formulary.
The solution should provide inventory control for multiple facilities, with each having their own inventory database.
The solution should provide inventory control for multiple locations within a facility. 
The solution should provide the option to use bar code readers for inventory management functions.  
The solution should support perpetual inventory.
The solution should have a standard bi-directional interface to a variety of  storage and retrieval systems that automate and manage inventory throughout the receiving, storage, retrieval, and distribution process.
The solution should maintain and display vendor file.
The solution should provide on-line entry of stock received, adjusted, and transferred.
The solution should provide a direct interface with drug wholesaler information systems.
The solution should allow a manual correction to a count of an item in inventory by increasing or decreasing the item’s on hand quantity.
The solution should offer a Return to Stock function.
The solution should track and maintain minimum and maximum inventory levels.
The solution should identify the primary vendor or manufacturer of inventory items.
The solution should flag drugs when their user-defined critical order levels are reached.
The solution should allow electronic ordering from prime vendors using an X.12 interface.
The solution should prepare purchase orders based on inventory levels, usage and other reorder criteria.
The solution should provide automatic or on demand generation of purchase orders.
The solution should provide purchase order reconciliation electronically and manually.
The solution should alert the user of discontinued, back ordered, non-formulary, etc drug orders at the point of ordering from the vendor.
The solution should provide a process to quickly order back-ordered, discontinued drugs, etc.  from another vendor or manufacturer.
These solution should allow inventory updates electronically and manually from sources determined by CCHCS.
The solution should allow automatic updates for inventory data via multiple sources as determined by CCHCS.
The solution should provide flexibility in how items are deducted from inventory and supports concurrent multiple methodologies within the same facility.
The solution should maintain pricing data for all formulary and non-formulary items.  
The solution should support electronic and manual pricing updates.
The solution should provide user-definable pricing formulas to copy existing pricing formulas to create new ones.
The solution should track prices based on AWP, Bid, or MAC price.
The solution should provide a price modeling function to analyze the impact of price structure changes before implementation.
The solution should support entry of pricing information and choice of a "charge" algorithm e.g. minimum charge, handling fees, percent markups, etc. 
The solution should assign lot numbers for prepared medication packages.
The solution should support and track controlled medication inventory levels.
The solution should maintain "vault" records for controlled medications.
The solution should support fractional inventory calculation, user definable at time of order entry.
The solution should provide inventory valuation based on CCHCS criteria.
The solution should support on demand inventory valuation.
The solution should print pharmacy inventory audit/cycle count  worksheet listing drug data, quantity-on-hand and last audit/verification date.
The solution should track departmental (or other types) requisitions with printed monthly transaction statements.
The solution should support floor stock medication or bulk stock inventory control.  
The solution should support daily floor stock or bulk stock medication lists on demand or at a user-defined time.
The solution should support complete floor stock usage tracking, charging, and statistical reporting.
The solution should print prepackaging log and inventory transfers.
The solution should support the ability to check in inventory received from another store and to automatically update the inventory levels.
The solution should support the ability to transfer inventory received to another store and to automatically update the inventory levels. 
The solution should track drugs returned to manufacturer or wholesalers.
The solution should track physician-prescribing patterns.
The solution should generate spoilage report for outdated inventory.
The solution should track wholesaler performance.
The solution should maintain data on drugs borrowed from and loaned to other institutions.
Requirement Statement

The solution should comply with the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Privacy Rule  (Protected health information, or PHI, is defined at 45 CFR § 160.103, which can be found on the
OCR website at http://hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa.)
The solution should comply with the HIPAA Security Rule. 
The solution should comply with the HIPAA Security Rule: Administrative Safeguards. In general, these are the administrative functions that should be implemented to meet the security standards. These include assignment or delegation of security responsibility to an individual and security training requirements.
The solution should comply with the HIPAA Security Rule: Physical Safeguards. The Security Rule defines physical safeguards as physical measures, policies, and procedures to protect a covered entity’s electronic information solutions and related buildings and equipment, from natural and environmental hazards, and unauthorized intrusion. The standards are another line of defense (adding to the Security Rule’s administrative and technical safeguards) for protecting EPHI.
The solution should comply with the HIPAA Security Rule: Technical Safeguards. The Security Rule defines technical safeguards in § 164.304 as the technology and the policy and procedures for its use that protect electronic protected health information and control access to it.
The solution should comply with Electronic Transactions and Code Sets Rule. 
The solution should comply with the National identifier requirements for employers, providers, and health plans - The Employer Identification Number (EIN), issued by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), was selected as the identifier for employers. The National Provider Identifier (NPI) was adopted as the standard unique health identifier for health care providers. 
The HIPAA security requirements are designed to be technology neutral and scalable. Per CFR 164.306(b) the solution should take into account (1) The size, complexity and capabilities of the organization. (2) The organization's technical infrastructure, hardware, and software security capabilities. (3) The costs of security measures. (4) The probability and criticality of potential risks to EPHI.
The solution should protect Individually identifiable health information that is information, including demographic data, that relates to:  (1) the individual’s past, present or future physical or mental health or condition; (2) the provision of health care to the individual, or 3) the past, present, or future payment for the provision of health care to the individual, and that identifies the individual or for which there is a reasonable basis to believe can be used to identify the individual; (3) Individually identifiable health information includes many common identifiers (e.g., name, address, birth date, Social Security Number).
The solution should comply with the Privacy Rule that protects all individually identifiable health information held or transmitted by a covered entity or its business associate, in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral. The Privacy Rule calls this information "protected health information (PHI).
The solution should provide HIPAA records and compliance reports. 
The solution should provide reports for records of information solution activity, such as audit logs, access reports, and security incident tracking reports.
The solution should provide the ability to grant and revoke access to electronic protected health information managed by the solution.
The solution should maintain retrievable exact copies of electronic protected health information.
The solution should provide the ability to restore any loss of data.
The solution should implement technical policies and procedures for electronic information solutions that maintain electronic protected health information to allow access only to those persons or software programs that have been granted access rights as specified in 45 CFR 164.308(a)(4) [Information Access Management].
The solution should assign a unique name and/or number for identifying and tracking user identity (Global User ID).
The solution should implement electronic procedures that terminate an electronic session after a predetermined time of inactivity.
The solution should implement a mechanism to encrypt and decrypt electronic protected health information.
The organization should implement hardware, software, and/or procedural mechanisms that record and examine activity in information solutions that contain or use electronic protected health information.
The solution should implement electronic mechanisms to corroborate that electronic protected health information has not been altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner.
The solution should implement procedures to verify that a person or entity seeking access to electronic protected health information is the one claimed.
The solution should implement technical security measures to guard against unauthorized access to electronic protected health information that is being transmitted over an electronic communications network.
The solution should implement security measures to ensure that electronically transmitted electronic protected health information is not improperly modified without detection until disposed of.
The solution should implement a mechanism to encrypt electronic protected health information whenever deemed appropriate.
The solution should restrict access and uses of protected health information based on the specific user's role.
The solution should have the ability to de-identify health information which neither identifies nor provides a reasonable basis to identify an individual.
The solution should remove identifiers of the individual or of relatives, employers, or household members of the individualto achieve the safe harbor method of de-identification.
The solution should support two ways to de-identify information; either: 1) a formal determination by a qualified statistician; or 2) the removal of specified identifiers of the individual and of the individual’s relatives, household members, and employers is required, and is adequate only if the covered entity has no actual knowledge that the remaining information could be used to identify the individual.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Medical record numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Social security numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Electronic mail addresses.
The solution de-identification capability should include: FAX numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Telephone numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to the individual, including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death; and all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except that such ages and elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older;
The solution de-identification capability should include:  All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes, except for the initial three digits of a zip code if, according to the current publicly available data from the Bureau of Census (1) the geographic units formed by combining all zip codes with the same three initial digits contains more than 20,000 people; and (2) the initial three digits of a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or fewer people is changed to 000;
The solution de-identification capability should include: Names.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs).
The solution de-identification capability should include: Device identifiers and serial numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Certificate/license numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Health plan beneficiary numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Account numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Full face photographic images and any comparable images.
The solution de-identification capability should include: Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code, except as permitted for re-identification purposes provided certain conditions are met. In addition to the removal of the above-stated identifiers, the covered entity may not have actual knowledge that the remaining information could be used alone or in combination with any other information to identify an individual who is subject of the information.
The solution should provide the ability to provide patients a copy of their protected health information in a covered entity’s designated record set.
The solution should provide the ability to not provide patients access to the following protected health information: psychotherapy notes, information compiled for legal proceedings, laboratory results to which the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA) prohibits access, or information held by certain research laboratories.
The solution should use more secure connections for email via SSL and the use of message-level standards such as S/MIME, SET, PEM, PGP, etc.
The solution should implement two-factor authentication for granting remote access to solutions that contain EPHI. This process requires factors beyond general User IDs (i.e. usernames) and passwords to gain access to solutions (e.g., requiring users to answer a security question such as "Favorite Pet's Name").
The solution should implement a process for creating a unique User ID (i.e. user name) and performing authentication when granting remote access to a workforce member. This may be done using Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) or other similar tools.
The solution should have appropriate default values for session termination (time-out) on inactive portable or remote devices.
The solution should implement a policy to encrypt backup and archival media; ensure that policies direct the user of encryption technologies of the appropriate strength.
The solution should prohibit or prevent download of EPHI onto remote solutions or devices without an operational justification.
The solution should minimize use of browser-cached data in web based applications which manage EPHI, particularly those accessed remotely.
The solution should prohibit transmission of EPHI via open networks, such as the Internet, where appropriate.
The solution should prohibit the use of offsite devices or wireless access points (e.g. hotel workstations) for non-secure access to email.
The solution should use biometrics, such as fingerprint readers, on portable devices.
The solution should implement and mandate appropriately strong encryption solutions for transmission of EPHI (e.g. SSL, HTTPS, etc.). SSL should be a minimum requirement for all Internet-facing solutions which manage EPHI in any form, including corporate web-mail solutions.
The solution should support the Health Care Claims or equivalent encounter information (X12N 837).
The solution should support the Eligibility for a Health Plan (X12N 270/271).
The solution should support the Referral Certification and Authorization (X12N 278 or NCPDP for retail pharmacy).
The solution should support the Health Care Claim Status (X12N 276/277).
The solution should support the Enrollment and Disenrollment in a Health Plan (X12N 834).
The solution should support the Health Care Payment and Remittance Advice (X12N 835).
The solution should support the Health Plan Premium Payments (X12N 820).
The solution should support the Coordination of Benefits (X12N 837 or NCPDP for retail pharmacy).

The solution should provide a standardized audit log that supports both security risk management and fraud management.
The solution should provide a date/time/user stamp for each clinical entry at data element level or some other suitable mechanism to allow assessment of the number of user operations used to create an encounter note or encounter note update.
The solution should provide a date/time/user stamp of each access to the EMR.
The solution should provide a date/time/user stamp of signature event (whether proactive or auto default) for encounter or progress notes.
The solution should provide a date/time of release of encounter or progress note for administrative/billing process or, alternatively, date/time billing transaction was created based on encounter or progress note.
The solution should provide minimum data to be captured in the audit log includes the following:
Access type (i.e., creating, editing, viewing, printing, or electronically transferring all or any part of the patient record)
User ID, including National Provider Identifier (NPI) number if available, of person accessing the record
Location or logical address from which the information was accessed
Date and time that the information was accessed using NTP/SNTP synchronized time
For printing or transferring electronically all or parts of a record that is initiated by a user, reason for transaction entered by user
The solution audit log should be operational whenever the solution is available for updates or viewing of the clinical record. There may be exceptional circumstances for technical or other reasons when this cannot occur:
If the solution supports a user command to disable or enable the audit log, such command should be limited to roles associated with users that administer the solution.
The solution should log all user commands that enable or disable the audit log in the audit log as auditable events.
If the solution is accepting updates at a time when the audit log is impaired or disabled, a notification of the occurrence of this state will be made available to the solution administrator.
The audit log should support a means of unequivocally determining if it contains gaps when users updated the record while the audit log was not being recorded, even if the audit log was not recorded for a reason other than explicit disablement by a user. Such determination should be evident solely by examining the audit log.
The solution should not allow deletions or alteration of the contents of the audit log.
The solution should support a user-friendly output version of the audit log for transmission, printing, or export, which shows all details of events.
Audit Support Function: Require documentation of the audit support functionality in the vendor provided user guides and other support documentation, including how to identify and retrospectively reconstruct all data elements in the audit log including date, time and method of entry.
The solution should have the capacity to allow authorized entities to read only access according to agreed upon uses and only as a part of an identified audit subject to appropriate authentication, authorization, and access control procedures. Such access should also be subject to appropriate release of information protocols, local audit policies, minimum necessary criteria, and other contractual arrangements and, laws, and:
The solution should support an auditor as a class of user.
The solution should limit access to pertinent functions and views only for portions of audit logs covered by the audit.
Access remains controlled by the facility and the same authentication and audit supports would apply.
Remote access may be offered if agreed to by the clinical data organization subject to the aforementioned protocols and suitable authentication
The solution should retain all EMR data and clinical documents (including audit logs) for the time periods designated by the EMR solution owner’s policies or legal requirements. Audit logs should be retained as long as clinical records. Provide the ability to destroy, deactivate, or archive EMR data/records in a solutionatic way according to the EHR solution owner’s policies and after legally-prescribed retention periods.
The solution should support the use of the National Provider Identifier (NPI) in the EMR audit log to identify the individual provider, or, in situations when an NPI is not available for an individual, a single unique internal provider identifier is assigned.
The solution should support user ID/strong passwords.
The solution should demonstrate the ability to evolve the level of user authentication in the future, as industry standards require.
The solution should provide the capability to produce a business version of each encounter note or progress note which indicates:
Date/time/user stamp for each entry
The methods used in the creation of the entry including but not limited to:
Direct entry via integrated hardware keyboard or mouse
Speech recognition
Automated, machine-entered default information
Pre-created documentation via form or template
Copy/import of an object including date/time user stamp of original author
Copy forward previous note contents including date/time user stamp of original author
Dictation/ Transcription
Import from an external solution
If a copy of the encounter note is required or desired to accompany a claim, provide the ability to submit the business version.
The solution should be capable of prompting for omitted necessary administrative data or codes. This could include the capability to prompt a physician if the selected E&M code is not consistent with the documentation in the encounter note.
Prompts that are driven by E&M administrative processes should not explicitly or implicitly direct a user to add documentation. This does not apply to prompts for additional documentation for E&M levels already achieved, for medical necessity or for quality guidelines/clinical decision support.
The solution should retain date/time/user stamp of original data entry person when data entered on behalf of another author.
If an assistant is used to enter data that will subsequently be signed by a provider, retain the date/time/use stamp of the data entry person as well as the provider.
The solution should retain the original documents and any amendments after signature event (including automatic closing of record). Any updates after signature event should be handled as amendments.
The solution should have the capacity to allow authorized entities read-only access to the EMR according to agreed upon uses and only as a part of an identified audit subject to appropriate authentication, authorization, and access control functionality. Such access controls should also support the applicable release of information protocols, local audit policies, minimum necessary criteria, and other contractual arrangements and, laws, and:
The solution should support an auditor as a class of user.
The solution should limit access to pertinent functions and views only for patient records covered by the audit.
Access remains controlled by the facility and the same authentication and audit supports would apply.
Remote access may be offered if agreed to by the organization subject to the aforementioned protocols and suitable authentication.
The solution should generate and embed a document ID tracking number for patient chart outputs or exports, unique for each instance when a patient chart output/document is printed, electronically communicated, or otherwise exported from the EMR:
Display tracking number on printed document (regardless of the document format including, but not be limited to .doc, .pdf, etc. and attach to electronic copy.
Tracking number audit record should contain user creating document, date/time, and an option to include the reason for printing or transferring an electronic copy of the document.
Tracking number function requirement also applies to transfers of information from the EMR solution to a billing solution where these are separate or otherwise independently functioning solutions.
Maintain an audit log of tracking numbers in a file that is treated as a business record of the organization.
Allow patient access to his or her own completed records and release of information (disclosure) log, as required by law or agreed to by the clinical provider.
The solution should have the ability to capture patient comments in the EMR.
The solution should provide the capability to document/record that identity-proofing was completed and the method used to verify (i.e., check photo id, prior relationship, or verification of information an individual knows or can produce) consistent with the recommendations of the Confidentiality/Privacy/Security Workgroup of the American Health Information Community.
The EHR solution should have the ability to accept structured and coded data for existing data standards.
Support directly capturing clinical information from the clinician in structured and coded form to the maximum degree possible consistent with the principle of not adversely impacting user productivity.
Transmit clinical information to other information solutions using standards that retain the available level of coding and structure, such as the HL7 Clinical Data Architecture
Require a traceable and auditable path from a claim payment or a transmission of a pay for performance payment to the clinical documentation supporting it.
Information transmitted to a claims preparation solution will include the Document ID tracking number generated in the EHR traceability requirement above.
All information transmitted for the purposes of supporting claims or pay for performance payments will be logged in an audit file that cannot subsequently be changed by a user or administrator of the EHR solution. The audit file will include the time at which the submission was created and any relevant document ID tracking numbers generated under the EHR traceability requirement above.
The Secretary adopts the content exchange standard and associated implementation specification: Patient summary record - Health Level Seven Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) Release 2, Continuity of Care Document (CCD). The Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel (HITSP) Summary Documents Using HL7 CCD Component HITSP/C32. ASTM E2369 Standard.
The Secretary adopts the content exchange standard and associated implementation specification: Electronic prescribing. Standard. The National Council for the Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) Prescriber/Pharmacist Interface SCRIPT standard, Implementation Guide, Version 8, Release 1 (Version 8.1) October 2005. The NCPDP Prescriber/Pharmacist Interface SCRIPT standard, Implementation Guide, Version 8, Release 1 (Version 8.1) October 2005. . NCPDP SCRIPT Standard, Implementation Guide, Version 10.6.
The Secretary adopts the content exchange standard and associated implementation specification: Electronic submission to public health agencies for surveillance or reporting. Standard. HL7 2.3.1. Public Health Information Network HL7 Version 2.5 Message Structure Specification for National Condition Reporting Final Version 1.0 and Errata and Clarifications National Notification Message Structural Specification.
The Secretary adopts the content exchange standard and associated implementation specification: Electronic submission to immunization registries. Implementation Guide for Immunization Data Transactions using Version 2.3.1 of the HL7 Standard Protocol Implementation Guide Version 2.2. HL7 2.5.1 Implementation Guide for Immunization Messaging Release 1.0.
The Secretary adopts the content exchange standard and associated implementation specification: Quality reporting. Standard. The CMS Physician Quality Reporting Initiative (PQRI) 2009 Registry XML Specification. Implementation specifications. Physician Quality Reporting Initiative Measure Specifications Manual for Claims and Registry.
The Secretary adopts the content exchange standard and associated implementation specification: Electronic submission of lab results to public health agencies. Standard. HL7 2.5.1. Implementation specifications. HL7 Version 2.5.1 Implementation Guide: Electronic Laboratory Reporting to Public Health, Release 1 (US Realm).
The Secretary adopts the code sets, terminology, and nomenclature as the vocabulary standard: International Health Terminology Standards Development Organization (IHTSDO) solutionatized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT®) July 2009 version.
The Secretary adopts the code sets, terminology, and nomenclature as the vocabulary standard: Any source vocabulary that is included in RxNorm, a standardized nomenclature for clinical drugs produced by the United States National Library of Medicine.
The Secretary adopts the code sets, terminology, and nomenclature as the vocabulary standard: Immunizations. Standard. HL7 Standard Code Set CVX Vaccines Administered, July 30, 2009 version.
The Secretary adopts the code sets, terminology, and nomenclature as the vocabulary standard: Race and Ethnicity. Standard. The Office of Management and Budget Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity, Statistical Policy Directive No. 15, October 30, 1997.
The Secretary adopts the code sets, terminology, and nomenclature as the vocabulary standard: Laboratory test results. Standard. Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC®) version 2.27, when such codes were received within an electronic transaction from a laboratory.
The Secretary adopts the standard to protect electronic health information created, maintained, and exchanged: Encryption and decryption of electronic health information: (1) General. Any encryption algorithm identified by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as an approved security function in Annex A of the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) Publication 140-2. Any encrypted and integrity protected link.
The Secretary adopts the standard to protect electronic health information created, maintained, and exchanged: Record actions related to electronic health information. The date, time, patient identification, and user
identification should be recorded when electronic health information is created, modified, accessed, or deleted; and an indication of which action(s) occurred and by whom should also be recorded.
The Secretary adopts the standard to protect electronic health information created, maintained, and exchanged: Record treatment, payment, and
health care operations disclosures. The date, time, patient identification, user identification, and a description of the disclosure should be recorded for disclosures for treatment, payment, and health care operations, as these terms are defined at 45 CFR 164.501.
The Secretary adopts the standard to protect electronic health information created, maintained, and exchanged: Verification that electronic health information has not been altered in transit. A hashing algorithm with a security strength equal to or greater than SHA-1 (Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-1) as specified by the NIST in FIPS PUB 180-3 (October, 2008)) should be used to verify that electronic health information has not been altered.
Drug-drug, drug-allergy interaction checks -  Notifications. Automatically and electronically generate and indicate in real-time, notifications at the point of care for drug-drug and drug-allergy contraindications based on medication list, medication allergy list, and computerized provider order entry (CPOE).
Adjustments. Provide certain users with the ability to adjust notifications provided for drug-drug and drug-allergy interaction checks.
Drug-formulary checks. Enable a user to electronically check if drugs are in a formulary or preferred drug list.
Maintain active medication list. Enable a user to electronically record, modify, and retrieve a patient’s active medication list as well as medication history for longitudinal care.
Maintain active medication allergy list. Enable a user to electronically record, modify, and retrieve a patient’s active medication allergy list as well as medication allergy history for longitudinal care.
Record and chart vital signs - Vital signs. Enable a user to electronically record, modify, and retrieve a patient’s vital signs including, at a minimum, height, weight, and blood pressure.
Record and chart vital signs - Calculate body mass index. Automatically calculate and display body mass index (BMI) based on a patient’s height and weight.
Record and chart vital signs - Plot and display growth charts. Plot and electronically display, upon request, growth charts for patients 2-20 years old.
Smoking status. Enable a user to electronically record, modify, and retrieve the smoking status of a patient. Smoking status types should include: current every day smoker; current some day smoker; former smoker; never smoker; smoker, current status unknown; and unknown if ever smoked.
Incorporate laboratory test results - Receive results. Electronically receive clinical laboratory test results in a structured format and display such results in human readable format.
Incorporate laboratory test results - Display test report information. Electronically display all the information for a test report specified at 42 CFR 493.1291©(1) through (7).
Incorporate laboratory test results - Incorporate results. Electronically attribute, associate, or link a laboratory test result to a laboratory order or patient record.
Generate patient lists. Enable a user to electronically select, sort, retrieve, and generate lists of patients according to, at a minimum, the data elements included in: (1) Problem list, (2) Medication list, (3) Demographics, and (4) Laboratory test results.
Medication reconciliation. Enable a user to electronically compare two or more medication lists.
Submission to immunization registries. Electronically record, modify, retrieve, and submit immunization information.
Public health surveillance. Electronically record, modify, retrieve, and submit syndrome-based public health surveillance information.
Patient-specific education resources. Enable a user to electronically identify and provide patient-specific education resources according to, at a minimum, the data elements included in the patient’s: problem list; medication list; and laboratory test results; as well as provide such resources to the patient.
Automated measure calculation. For each meaningful use objective with a percentage-based measure, electronically record the numerator and denominator and generate a report including the numerator, denominator, and resulting percentage associated with each applicable meaningful use measure.
Access control. Assign a unique name and/or number for identifying and tracking user identity and establish controls that permit only authorized users to access electronic health information.
Emergency access. Permit authorized users (who are authorized for emergency situations) to access electronic health information during an emergency.
Automatic log-off. Terminate an electronic session after a predetermined time of inactivity.
Integrity.  Create a message digest in accordance with the standard specified in § 170.210©.
Verify in accordance with the standard specified in § 170.210© upon receipt of electronically exchanged health information that such information has not been altered.
Detection. Detect the alteration of audit logs.
Authentication. Verify that a person or entity seeking access to electronic health information is the one claimed and is authorized to access such information.
General encryption. Encrypt and decrypt electronic health information in accordance with the standard specified in § 170.210(a)(1), unless the Secretary determines that the use of such algorithm would pose a significant security risk for Certified HER Technology.
Encryption when exchanging electronic health information. Encrypt and decrypt electronic health information when exchanged.
Accounting of disclosures. Record disclosures made for treatment, payment, and health care operations.
Maintain up-to-date problem list. Enable a user to electronically record, modify, and retrieve a patient’s problem list for longitudinal care.
Audit log. —Record actions. Record actions related to electronic health information.
Automatic log-off. Terminate an electronic session after a predetermined time of inactivity.
Covered entities should comply with the breach notification regulations implement provisions of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, passed as part of American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA).
Following a breach of unsecured protected health information covered entities should provide notification of the breach to affected individuals, the Secretary, and, in certain circumstances, to the media.
Covered entities should provide this individual notice in written form by first-class mail, or alternatively, by e-mail if the affected individual has agreed to receive such notices electronically.
These individual notifications should be provided without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 days following the discovery of a breach and should include, to the extent possible, a description of the breach, a description of the types of information that were involved in the breach, the steps affected individuals should take to protect themselves from potential harm, a brief description of what the covered entity is doing to investigate the breach, mitigate the harm, and prevent further breaches, as well as contact information for the covered entity.
Covered entities that experience a breach affecting more than 500 residents of a State or jurisdiction are, in addition to notifying the affected individuals, required to provide notice to prominent media outlets serving the State or jurisdiction.
Covered entities should notify the Secretary of breaches of unsecured protected health information.  Covered entities will notify the Secretary by visiting the HHS web site and filling out and electronically submitting a breach report form.  If a breach affects 500 or more individuals, covered entities should notify the Secretary without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 days following a breach.
If a breach of unsecured protected health information occurs at or by a business associate, the business associate should notify the covered entity following the discovery of the breach.  A business associate should provide notice to the covered entity without unreasonable delay and no later than 60 days from the discovery of the breach.  To the extent possible, the business associate should provide the covered entity with the identification of each individual affected by the breach as well as any information required to be provided by the covered entity in its notification to affected individuals.
Covered entities and business associates have the burden of proof to demonstrate that all required notifications have been provided or that a use or disclosure of unsecured protected health information did not constitute a breach.
